=== FILE: 01_cwm.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
CWM: An Open-Weights LLM for Research on Code
Generation with World Models
Meta FAIR CodeGen Team
We release Code World Model (CWM), a 32-billion-parameter open-weights LLM, to advance research
on code generation with world models. To improve code understanding beyond what can be learned
from training on static code alone, we mid-trainCWMon a large amount of observation-action
trajectories from Python interpreter and agentic Docker environments, and perform extensive multi-
task reasoning RL in verifiable coding, math, and multi-turn software engineering environments. With
CWM, we provide a strong testbed for researchers to explore the opportunities world modeling affords
for improving code generation with reasoning and planning in computational environments. We
present first steps of how world models can benefit agentic coding, enable step-by-step simulation of
Python code execution, and show early results of how reasoning can benefit from the latter.CWMis
a dense, decoder-only LLM trained with a context size of up to131 ktokens. Independent of its world
modeling capabilities,CWMoffers strong performance on general coding and math tasks: it reaches
pass@1 scores of65.8 %on SWE-bench Verified (with test-time scaling),68.6 %on LiveCodeBench,
96.6 %on Math-500, and76.0 %on AIME 2024. To support further research on code world modeling,
we release model checkpoints after mid-training, SFT, and RL.
Date:September 29, 2025
Inference Code:github.com/facebookresearch/cwm
Model Weights:ai.meta.com/resources/models-and-libraries/cwm-downloads,
huggingface.co/facebook/cwm,../cwm-sft,../cwm-pretrain
1 Introduction
Software development is one of the domains where Large Language Models (LLMs) have already had a
significant real-world impact (Cui et al., 2024; Bick et al., 2024). They have quickly been adopted into the
workflows of software engineers worldwide, and their capabilities are advancing fast: from only supporting
programmers with small snippets of code to fixing issues or writing code bases autonomously (Yeverechyahu
et al., 2024; Handa et al., 2025). However, reliably generating high-quality code remains a challenge even for
the current generation of LLMs, with benchmarks consistently revealing shortcomings upon release (Hendrycks
et al., 2021a; Chen et al., 2021; Aider Team, 2025; Jimenez et al., 2024).
We believe that advancing code generation with LLMs may require new training and modeling paradigms.
Typically, code is treated the same as any other text data during pre-training: the model learns to predict
code line by line, from left to right and top to bottom. We think this is not sufficient – to master coding, one
must understand not just what codelooks likebut what itdoeswhen executed. Such skill is instrumental to
the everyday work of software engineers: at a local level, they understand how the execution of a line of code
changes the state of the local variables, and, at a global level, they can make predictions about how changes
to a codebase affect program outputs. Yet, teaching LLMs suchcode world modelingcapabilities is typically
not considered before post-training.
We release Code World Model (CWM), a new LLM for code generation and reasoning that has been trained
on large amounts of code world modeling data. Concretely,CWMis mid-trained on two different kinds
of observation-action trajectories that capture important aspects of software development: Python code
execution traces and agentic interactions with Docker environments. Mid-training on such data at scale should
help improve coding performance by grounding our model’s predictions in the underlying dynamical systems
and provide a superior starting point for RL.
For the Python execution data, actions are Python statements and observations contain the contents of the
1
arXiv:2510.02387v1  [cs.SE]  30 Sep 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
PRE-TRAINING POST-TRAINING
General 
Pre-training
8T tokens
8k context
Code World Modeling 
Mid-training
5T tokens
131k context
Supervised Fine-tuning 
Instruction and Reasoning
100B tokens
32k context
Joint Reinforcement Learning  
Agentic and Reasoning
172B tokens
131k context
CWM pretrained CWM sft CWM
Figure 1Overview of theCWMtraining stages and the model checkpoints that we release. We generally report
performance of the final CWM (instruct, RL trained) model, except where otherwise stated.
local variables. By trainingCWMon a trajectory of observation-action pairs conditioned on the code only
as context, we directly teach the model how the execution of a line of Python affects the state of the local
variables. Our premise here is that teachingCWMthe semantics and not just syntax of programs should
help with writing code as well as with reasoning tasks like verification, testing, and debugging.
We also trainCWMon a large-scale collection of synthetically generated agentic interactions with computa-
tional environments. These trajectories are generated with our so-called ForagerAgent, which “forages” for
data covering agentic software engineering scenarios such as implementing missing functionality or fixing
bugs from error messages. Actions here are shell-like commands or code edits generated by the agent, and
observations are responses from the running environment. While it is not uncommon for recent models to
include similar data, this is mostly done at smaller scale during post-training (Yang et al., 2025b). Data
from ForagerAgent, on the other hand, is large scale and included already during mid-training, helping shape
internal representations ahead of post-training.
CWMuses a dense, decoder-only Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2018) with
32 Bparameters, interleaved sliding window attention supporting up to131 ktokens context size, and is
trained over pre-, mid-, and post-training phases (see Figure 1). With quantization, inference withCWMcan
be performed on a single80GB NVIDIA H100. Beyond world modeling capabilities,CWMachieves strong
performance on general and agentic coding and reasoning tasks relative to other open-weights models of
comparable size: it reaches pass@1 scores of65.8 %on SWE-bench Verified (with test-time scaling; see Figure 2),
68.6 %on LiveCodeBench-v5,96.6 %on Math-500,76.0 %on AIME 2024, and94.3 %on CruxEval Output.
First and foremost, the release ofCWMis meant to enable novel research on improving code generation
with world modeling. We are excited by this vision and our report provides early supportive evidence: we
give examples of how world models can benefit agentic coding, enable step-by-step simulation of Python
code execution, and show early results of how reasoning can benefit from the latter. However, we believe the
best is yet to come and hope to join forces with the open source research community to explore how world
models can be used to leverage reasoning and planning to improve code generation. To this end, we release
both the final weights and intermediate checkpoints under a noncommercial research license. GivenCWM’s
competitive performance, we conducted a preparedness assessment which concluded thatCWMis unlikely to
increase catastrophic risks beyond those present in the current model ecosystem.1
2 Code world model datasets
CWMis trained on a large variety of datasets across pre-, mid-, and post-training phases. We focus strongly
on code and code world modeling data across all stages of training. We highlight two large-scale data collection
efforts that empowerCWM’s world modeling capabilities: Python execution traces and ForagerAgent. We
refer to §4 for more traditional ingredients in our datamixes.
2.1 Executable repository images: building repositories at scale
A core prerequisite for capturing Python execution traces and agentic trajectories in real-world software engi-
neeringtasksisexecutingcodeinrepositoriesatscale. Forisolationandrepeatability, webuildtheserepositories
1See ai.meta.com/research/publications/cwm-preparedness and §8 for details.
2