=== FILE: 03_exectuning.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Preprint
WHAT I CANNOT EXECUTE , I DO NOT UNDERSTAND :
TRAINING AND EVALUATING LLM S ON PROGRAM
EXECUTION TRACES
Jordi Armengol-Estap´e1∗, Quentin Carbonneaux 2, Tianjun Zhang 2,
Aram H. Markosyan 2, V olker Seeker2, Chris Cummins 2, Melanie Kambadur 2,
Michael F .P . O’Boyle1, Sida Wang2, Gabriel Synnaeve 2, Hugh Leather 2
1University of Edinburgh 2Meta AI
ABSTRACT
Code generation and understanding are critical capabilities for large language
models (LLMs). Thus, most LLMs are pretrained and fine-tuned on code data.
However, these datasets typically treat code as static strings and rarely exploit the
dynamic information about their execution. Building upon previous work on trace
modeling, we study Execution Tuning (E.T.), a training procedure in which we
explicitly model real-world program execution traces without requiring manual
test annotations. We train and evaluate models on different execution trace granu-
larities (line and instruction-level) and strategies on the task of output prediction,
obtaining ∼80% accuracy on CruxEval and MBPP, and showing the advantages
of dynamic scratchpads (i.e., self-contained intermediate computations updated
by the model rather than accumulated as a history of past computations) on long
executions (up to 14k steps). Finally, we discuss E.T.’s practical applications.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Coding capabilities are one of the most important applications of large language models (LLMs)
(Brown et al., 2020), for which LLMs specialized on coding have been trained on large-scale datasets
of programming languages (Chen et al., 2021; Rozi`ere et al., 2024). Current state-of-the-art general-
purpose LLMs are thought to contain considerable proportions of code in their pretraining data
(OpenAI et al., 2024), which is known to improve reasoning capabilities even in tasks seemingly
unrelated to code (Aryabumi et al., 2024).
However, datasets used to train code LLMs (such as Lozhkov et al. (2024)) typically treat code
as static strings and rarely exploit the dynamic information about their execution. Executability
is one of the key differences between code and natural language, and most code datasets neglect
dimensions of the code domain such as reasoning over code execution, which in turn could lead to
better code understanding.
This fundamental limitation has sparked a renewed interest in modeling program executions, con-
necting with the pre-LLM neural program evaluation literature (Zaremba & Sutskever, 2014; Graves
et al., 2014), which studied whether neural networks could learn to execute programs. Austin et al.
(2021a) fine-tune LLMs to directly predict the output of Python functions from coding competitions
and math problems, which are paired with unit tests. Crucially, Nye et al. (2021) showed that ask-
ing (and training) the model to predict all the line-level states of a Python function execution up to
the return value improved the results on function output prediction, compared to directly asking to
predict the return value. They refer to these tokens emitted by the model to perform intermediate
computations before the final answer as scratchpad. In this work, we build upon this approach.
Nevertheless, key questions remain unanswered: 1. How we increase the number of examples in
trace datasets, given that the programs need to be executable? 2. How does trace granularity affect
the models’s performance? 3. How can we handle long execution traces? 4. What kind of scratchpad
∗Work done while interning at FAIR, Meta AI. Contact: jordi.armengol.estape@ed.ac.uk
1
arXiv:2503.05703v1  [cs.LG]  10 Feb 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
Preprint
works best for storing intermediate outputs - can we skip “unnecessary” intermediate steps? 5. What
are the effects of trace modeling on downstream code generation tasks?
1> def collatz(n):
2>     steps = 0 
3>     while n > 1:
4>         steps += 1 
5>         if n % 2 == 0: 
6>             n = n // 2 
7>         else: 
8>             n = 3 * n + 1 
9>     return steps
collatz.py
collatz(3038)?
1> def collatz(n):  # n=3038
2>     steps = 0  # n=3038; steps=0
3>     while n > 1:  # n=3038; steps=0
...
3> while n > 1:  # n=1; steps=22
9> return steps  # __return__=22
Scratchpad
111
Direct 
__line__=2, n=3038
__line__=3, n=3038; steps=0
...
__return__=154
Dynamic Scratchpad
Predict state after {1} step(s)
✔✘ ✘
Figure 1: Given a natural number, a function returns the number of iterations required to arrive
at 1, when following the sequence in the Collatz conjecture. Can we predict the output of such a
function for large inputs (3038 in our example) using LLMs? Asking an LLM to directly predict the
output results in a plausible but incorrect answer. Training a model to predict the intermediate traces
of the function as a scratchpad of intermediate computations (Nye et al., 2021) generally yields
more accurate output predictions, but can be impractical or even inaccurate with long executions. In
this work, we introduce dynamic scratchpads, in which the model updates a single, self-contained
scratchpad instance, yielding to more accurate predictions for long executions.
With the goal of answering these questions, we study Execution Tuning (E.T.), a training procedure
in which we explicitly model real-world program execution traces without requiring manual test
annotations (needed to execute the programs we want to trace). To scale trace modeling to large,
real-world programs, we start from a collection of ∼300k Python functions, made executable with
synthetic inputs generated by a combination of LLMs and fuzzing. We then build a custom Python
tracer to track local variables, global variables, and additional information obtained from the stack.
We statically represent traces in LLM-friendly formats, including iterators and functions. After trace
collection, to ingest traces to LLMs we study three levels of granularity: program (i.e., direct output
prediction), line, and bytecode instructions.
We compare three scratchpad strategies for storing the intermediate computations: a) regular
scratchpad (Nye et al., 2021), i.e., a dictionary with all the variable values at each step, b) com-
pact scratchpad containing the changed variables only (Ni et al., 2024), and c) dynamic scratchpad
(depicted in Figure 1), in which, rather than accumulating all the intermediate computation history,
the LLM is asked to update a single, self-contained representation of the current state of the program.
As a proxy of code reasoning, we evaluate models on program output prediction (given an input),
allowing them to generate intermediate execution states. We first evaluate on the standard out-
put prediction benchmark, CruxEval (Gu et al., 2024), on which models trained on traces clearly
outperform the direct output prediction ones. However, we also observe interesting failure modes
involving indexing and basic string manipulation. Aiming at evaluating on longer and more diverse
executions, we also run our models on a subset of a Python synthesis benchmark, MBPP (Austin
et al., 2021b), selecting functions with nested loops, where we observe higher disparity between
tracing strategies. To study even longer executions, we also study algorithmic tasks with arbitrar-
ily long execution lengths, including the Collatz conjecture (also known as the Ulam conjecture),
showing the advantages of dynamic scratchpads on long executions (success on up to 14k execution
steps) and the potential of dynamically skipping steps (allowing to decrease the needed intermediate
steps from e.g. 14k steps to 1.5k). Finally, we discuss applications by analyzing the effects of E.T.
on code generation and reasoning tasks.
2 E XECUTION TUNING
In this section, we describe the two implementation challenges of E.T. The first one is about where
and how to collect execution traces to construct a large and representative training dataset. The
second challenge is how to represent these traces to ingest them to the model. Figure 2 shows an
overview of the pipeline for these two challenges.
2