=== FILE: 04_codeexec.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Code Execution with Pre-trained Language Models
Chenxiao Liu1∗, Shuai Lu2, Weizhu Chen2, Daxin Jiang2,
Alexey Svyatkovskiy2, Shengyu Fu2, Neel Sundaresan2, Nan Duan2
1 Peking University 2 Microsoft
jadecxliu@gmail.com
{shuailu, wzchen, djiang}@microsoft.com
{alsvyatk, shengyfu, neels, nanduan}@microsoft.com
Abstract
Code execution is a fundamental aspect of pro-
gramming language semantics that reﬂects the
exact behavior of the code. However, most pre-
trained models for code intelligence ignore the
execution trace and only rely on source code
and syntactic structures. In this paper, we
investigate how well pre-trained models can
understand and perform code execution. We
develop a mutation-based data augmentation
technique to create a large-scale and realis-
tic Python dataset and task for code execu-
tion, which challenges existing models such
as Codex. We then present CodeExecutor, a
Transformer model that leverages code execu-
tion pre-training and curriculum learning to en-
hance its semantic comprehension. We evalu-
ate CodeExecutor on code execution and show
its promising performance and limitations. We
also demonstrate its potential beneﬁts for code
intelligence tasks such as zero-shot code-to-
code search and text-to-code generation. Our
analysis provides insights into the learning and
generalization abilities of pre-trained models
for code execution.
1 Introduction
Pre-trained models have achieved remarkable re-
sults in natural language (NL) tasks (Radford et al.,
2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020), in-
spiring the development of pre-trained models for
programming language (PL) tasks (Kanade et al.,
2020; Feng et al., 2020; Svyatkovskiy et al., 2020;
Wang et al., 2021b; Guo et al., 2021, 2022). These
models leverage source code and code structures,
such as abstract syntax tree (AST) (Wang et al.,
2021a; Guo et al., 2022) and data ﬂow (Guo et al.,
2021), to learn code-related tasks. These structures,
while useful, are not sufﬁcient to represent the dy-
namic behavior of code during execution, which is
reﬂected in the execution trace. Using Figure 1 as
∗Work done during internship at Microsoft. Shuai Lu and
Nan Duan are corresponding authors.
an example, the execution trace shows how code be-
haves during execution, reﬂecting the control ﬂow
and the state changes of variables. On the other
hand, as stated by Casalnuovo et al. (2020), source
code contains two channels of information: natural
& formal. The natural channel (Hindle et al., 2012),
such as identiﬁers and comments, enables language
models to be leveraged to understand code-related
tasks. The formal channel is used by interpreters
and compilers to specify execution and has precise
semantics. The formal channel is unique to code
and is what makes it executable. Execution trace
falls into the second category since it reveals the
formal channel of information that distinguishes
code from natural language, as well as enabling
code execution precisely (Casalnuovo et al., 2020;
Chakraborty et al., 2022).
In this work, we aim to teach pre-trained models
the real-world code execution process. We pro-
pose CodeExecutor, a Transformer-based model
that learns to execute arbitrary programs and pre-
dict their execution traces. To support pre-training
on large-scale data, we construct the Python Co-
deNetMut dataset by producing mutations based
on submissions to competitive programming prob-
lems from CodeNet (Puri et al., 2021), along with
single-line Python transformations and programs
adapted from Python ofﬁcial tutorial. We design
a pre-training task that predicts both the line order
and the intermediate states of the execution trace,
and apply curriculum learning to gradually increase
the difﬁculty of the programs.
We evaluate CodeExecutor on code execution
tasks and show that it outperforms existing mod-
els and demonstrates promising capabilities. We
also conduct an in-depth analysis of the model’s
performance and reveal its strengths and weak-
nesses. Furthermore, we show that CodeExecutor
can improve downstream tasks like zero-shot code-
to-code search and text-to-code generation, indicat-
ing the potential of leveraging execution trace to
arXiv:2305.05383v1  [cs.PL]  8 May 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
h = 3 w = 7n = 10for iin range(min(h, w)): n = n -max(h, w)      if n <= 0: print(i+ 1) break
<line> 1<state> h : 3 <line> 2<state> h : 3 ; w : 7<line> 3<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : 10<line> 4<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : 10 ; i: 0<line> 5<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : 3 ; i: 0<line> 6<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : 3 ; i: 0<line> 4<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : 3 ; i: 1<line> 5<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : -4 ; i: 1<line>6<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : -4 ; i: 1<output> 2 <line> 7<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : -4 ; i: 1<line> 8<state> h : 3 ; w : 7 ; n : -4 ; i: 1
12345678(a)SourceCode (b)ExecutionTrace
Figure 1: Sample source code and its execution trace in the code execution task.
enhance code intelligence. Our models and datasets
are publicly available1. In summary, the contribu-
tions of this paper are:
• We present the ﬁrst attempt at building a large-
scale pre-training dataset for real-world code
execution using a mutation-based data aug-
mentation approach.
• We propose a novel pre-trained model named
CodeExecutor that learns to predict the execu-
tion traces using a code execution pre-training
task and curriculum learning.
• We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of
CodeExecutor for code execution tasks, pro-
viding a detailed understanding of the model’s
performance.
• CodeExecutor signiﬁcantly improves code in-
telligence tasks like zero-shot code-to-code
search and text-to-code generation.
2 Related Work
2.1 Learning to Execute
Previous works form the learning to execute task
as a problem that reads a program and com-
putes the program’s output. These works lever-
age architectures such as recurrent neural networks
(Zaremba and Sutskever, 2014), graph neural net-
works (Bieber et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020) and
Transformers (Dehghani et al., 2019; Yan et al.,
2020; Austin et al., 2021; Nye et al., 2021). An-
other related task algorithm induction is to read a
short program, such as integer addition or polyno-
mial evaluation, and computes the output. Algo-
rithm induction task (Graves et al., 2014; Kurach
et al., 2016; Kaiser and Sutskever, 2016; Graves
1https://github.com/microsoft/CodeBERT/tree/
master/CodeExecutor
et al., 2016; Reed and de Freitas, 2016; Dehghani
et al., 2019; Velickovic et al., 2020a,b; Nye et al.,
2021) targets a particular algorithm with direct
algorithm-speciﬁc supervision compared with arbi-
trary programs in our code execution task.
Some emerging works also employ pre-trained
models to tackle the two tasks. Lu et al. (2022)
ﬁne-tunes a small fraction of the weights in GPT-
2 (Radford et al., 2019) on non-language tasks,
including simple algorithm induction tasks like Bit
XOR. Austin et al. (2021) evaluates models pre-
trained on web documents and dialog data ranging
in size from 2 million to 137 billion parameters and
shows that largest models are generally unable to
predict the output of a program, whether few-shot
or ﬁne-tuning. Nye et al. (2021) uses a "scratchpad"
to store intermediate computation steps to perform
multi-step computations, improving the ability of
models in Austin et al. (2021).
Different from previous works that predict pro-
gram’s output and mainly deal with speciﬁc algo-
rithms, we predict the program’s whole execution
trace and focus on imitating the real-world arbi-
trary program execution behavior. Besides, by us-
ing execution to capture code semantics, our work
is beneﬁcial for tasks related to code intelligence.
2.2 Mathematical Problem Solving
Mathematical problem solving is a related domain
of code execution. Recent works show the ability
of language models to solve math problems, which
requires learning to execute a soft algorithm to ar-
rive at a deterministic answer. Amini et al. (2019);
Ling et al. (2017) map math problems to opera-
tion programs and focus on sequence-to-program
generation. Saxton et al. (2019) introduce the Deep-
Mind Mathematics dataset, which contains plug-
and-chug problems such as addition, list sorting,
and function evaluation. Henighan et al. (2020)