=== FILE: 07_goker.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Understanding Real-World Concurrency Bugs in Go
Tengfei Tu∗
BUPT, Pennsylvania State University
tutengfei.kevin@bupt.edu.cn
Xiaoyu Liu
Purdue University
liu1962@purdue.edu
Linhai Song
Pennsylvania State University
songlh@ist.psu.edu
Yiying Zhang
Purdue University
yiying@purdue.edu
Abstract
Go is a statically-typed programming language that aims
to provide a simple, efficient, and safe way to build multi-
threaded software. Since its creation in 2009, Go has ma-
tured and gained significant adoption in production and
open-source software. Go advocates for the usage of mes-
sage passing as the means of inter-thread communication
and provides several new concurrency mechanisms and li-
braries to ease multi-threading programming. It is important
to understand the implication of these new proposals and the
comparison of message passing and shared memory synchro-
nization in terms of program errors, or bugs. Unfortunately,
as far as we know, there has been no study on Go’s concur-
rency bugs.
In this paper, we perform the first systematic study on
concurrency bugs in real Go programs. We studied six pop-
ular Go software including Docker, Kubernetes, and gRPC.
We analyzed 171 concurrency bugs in total, with more than
half of them caused by non-traditional, Go-specific problems.
Apart from root causes of these bugs, we also studied their
fixes, performed experiments to reproduce them, and eval-
uated them with two publicly-available Go bug detectors.
Overall, our study provides a better understanding on Go’s
concurrency models and can guide future researchers and
practitioners in writing better, more reliable Go software
and in developing debugging and diagnosis tools for Go.
CCS Concepts • Computing methodologies → Con-
current programming languages; • Software and its en-
gineering → Software testing and debugging .
∗The work was done when Tengfei Tu was a visiting student at Pennsylvania
State University.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS’19, April 13–17, 2019, Providence, RI, USA
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN ISBN 978-1-4503-6240-5/19/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3297858.3304069
Keywords Go; Concurrency Bug; Bug Study
ACM Reference Format:
Tengfei Tu, Xiaoyu Liu, Linhai Song, and Yiying Zhang. 2019. Un-
derstanding Real-World Concurrency Bugs in Go . InProceedings
of 2019 Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Op-
erating Systems (ASPLOS’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3297858.3304069
1 Introduction
Go [20] is a statically typed language originally developed
by Google in 2009. Over the past few years, it has quickly
gained attraction and is now adopted by many types of soft-
ware in real production. These Go applications range from
libraries [19] and high-level software [26] to cloud infrastruc-
ture software like container systems [13, 36] and key-value
databases [10, 15].
A major design goal of Go is to improve traditional multi-
threaded programming languages and make concurrent pro-
gramming easier and less error-prone. For this purpose, Go
centers its multi-threading design around two principles:
1) making threads (called goroutines) lightweight and easy
to create and 2) using explicit messaging (called channel)
to communicate across threads. With these design princi-
ples, Go proposes not only a set of new primitives and new
libraries but also new implementation of existing semantics.
It is crucial to understand how Go’s new concurrency prim-
itives and mechanisms impact concurrency bugs, the type of
bugs that is the most difficult to debug and the most widely
studied [40, 43, 45, 57, 61] in traditional multi-threaded pro-
gramming languages. Unfortunately, there has been no prior
work in studying Go concurrency bugs. As a result, to date,
it is still unclear if these concurrency mechanisms actually
make Go easier to program and less error-prone to concur-
rency bugs than traditional languages.
In this paper, we conduct the first empirical study on
Go concurrency bugs using six open-source, production-
grade Go applications: Docker [ 13] and Kubernetes [ 36],
two datacenter container systems, etcd [ 15], a distributed
key-value store system, gRPC [19], an RPC library, and Cock-
roachDB [10] and BoltDB [6], two database systems.
In total, we have studied 171 concurrency bugs in these ap-
plications. We analyzed the root causes of them, performed
experiments to reproduce them, and examined their fixing

--- PAGE 2 ---
patches. Finally, we tested them with two existing Go con-
currency bug detectors (the only publicly available ones).
Our study focuses on a long-standing and fundamental
question in concurrent programming: between message pass-
ing [27, 37] and shared memory, which of these inter-thread
communication mechanisms is less error-prone [2, 11, 48].
Go is a perfect language to study this question, since it pro-
vides frameworks for both shared memory and message
passing. However, it encourages the use of channels over
shared memory with the belief that explicit message passing
is less error-prone [1, 2, 21].
To understand Go concurrency bugs and the comparison
between message passing and shared memory, we propose
to categorize concurrency bugs along two orthogonal dimen-
sions: the cause of bugs and their behavior. Along the cause
dimension, we categorize bugs into those that are caused
by misuse of shared memory and those caused by misuse of
message passing. Along the second dimension, we separate
bugs into those that involve (any number of) goroutines that
cannot proceed (we call them blocking bugs) and those that
do not involve any blocking (non-blocking bugs).
Surprisingly, our study shows that it is as easy to make con-
currency bugs with message passing as with shared memory,
sometimes even more. For example, around 58% of blocking
bugs are caused by message passing. In addition to the viola-
tion of Go’s channel usage rules (e.g., waiting on a channel
that no one sends data to or close), many concurrency bugs
are caused by the mixed usage of message passing and other
new semantics and new libraries in Go, which can easily be
overlooked but hard to detect.
To demonstrate errors in message passing, we use a block-
ing bug from Kubernetes in Figure 1. The finishReq func-
tion creates a child goroutine using an anonymous func-
tion at line 4 to handle a request—a common practice in
Go server programs. The child goroutine executes fn() and
sends result back to the parent goroutine through channel
ch at line 6. The child will block at line 6 until the parent
pulls result from ch at line 9. Meanwhile, the parent will
block at select until either when the child sends result toch
(line 9) or when a timeout happens (line 11). If timeout hap-
pens earlier or if Go runtime (non-deterministically) chooses
the case at line 11 when both cases are valid, the parent will
return from requestReq() at line 12, and no one else can
pull result from ch any more, resulting in the child being
blocked forever. The fix is to change ch from an unbuffered
channel to a buffered one, so that the child goroutine can
always send the result even when the parent has exit.
This bug demonstrates the complexity of using new fea-
tures in Go and the difficulty in writing correct Go programs
like this. Programmers have to have a clear understanding
of goroutine creation with anonymous function, a feature
Go proposes to ease the creation of goroutines, the usage
of buffered vs. unbuffered channels, the non-determinism
of waiting for multiple channel operations using select,
1 func finishReq(timeout time.Duration) r ob {
2 - ch := make(chan ob)
3 + ch := make(chan ob, 1)
4 go func() {
5 result := fn()
6 ch <- result // block
7 } ()
8 select {
9 case result = <- ch:
10 return result
11 case <- time.After(timeout):
12 return nil
13 }
14 }
Figure 1. A blocking bug caused by channel.
and the special library time. Although each of these fea-
tures were designed to ease multi-threaded programming, in
reality, it is difficult to write correct Go programs with them.
Overall, our study reveals new practices and new issues of
Go concurrent programming, and it sheds light on an answer
to the debate of message passing vs. shared memory accesses.
Our findings improve the understanding of Go concurrency
and can provide valuable guidance for future tool design.
This paper makes the following key contributions.
• We performed the first empirical study of Go concur-
rency bugs with six real-world, production-grade Go
applications.
• We made nine high-level key observations of Go con-
currency bug causes, fixes, and detection. They can
be useful for Go programmers’ references. We further
make eight insights into the implications of our study
results to guide future research in the development,
testing, and bug detection of Go.
• We proposed new methods to categorize concurrency
bugs along two dimensions of bug causes and behav-
iors. This taxonomy methodology helped us to better
compare different concurrency mechanisms and corre-
lations of bug causes and fixes. We believe other bug
studies can utilize similar taxonomy methods as well.
All our study results and studied commit logs can be found
at https://github.com/system-pclub/go-concurrency-bugs.
2 Background and Applications
Go is a statically-typed programming language that is de-
signed for concurrent programming from day one [60]. Al-
most all major Go revisions include improvements in its con-
currency packages [23]. This section gives a brief background
on Go’s concurrency mechanisms, including its thread model,
inter-thread communication methods, and thread synchro-
nization mechanisms. We also introduce the six Go applica-
tions we chose for this study.
2.1 Goroutine
Go uses a concept called goroutine as its concurrency unit.
Goroutines are lightweight user-level threads that the Go