=== FILE: 08_gobench.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
GoBench: A Benchmark Suite of Real-World Go
Concurrency Bugs
Ting Yuan†‡, Guangwei Li†‡, Jie Lu†∗, Chen Liu†‡, Lian Li†‡∗ , and Jingling Xue§
† State Key Laboratory of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
‡ University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
§ University of New South Wales, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sydney, Australia
† {yuanting, liguangwei, lujie, liuchen17z, lianli }@ict.ac.cn§ jingling@cse.unsw.edu.au
Abstract—Go, a fast growing programming language, is often
considered as “the programming language of the cloud”. The
language provides a rich set of synchronization primitives, mak-
ing it easy to write concurrent programs with great parallelism.
However, the rich set of primitives also introduces many bugs.
We build GOBENCH , the ﬁrst benchmark suite for Go concur-
rency bugs. Currently, GOBENCH consists of 82 real bugs from 9
popular open source applications and 103 bug kernels. The bug
kernels are carefully extracted and simpliﬁed from 67 out of these
82 bugs and 36 additional bugs reported in a recent study to pre-
serve their bug-inducing complexities as much as possible. These
bugs cover a variety of concurrency issues, both traditional and
Go-speciﬁc. We believe GOBENCH will be instrumental in helping
researchers understand concurrency bugs in Go and develop
effective tools for their detection. We have therefore evaluated
a range of representative concurrency error detection tools using
GOBENCH . Our evaluation has revealed their limitations and
provided insights for making further improvements.
Index Terms—benchmarks, concurrency bugs, the Go language
I. I NTRODUCTION
The Google-born Go [1] is an open-source programming
language, which has gained much attention recently. It is one
of the fastest growing programming languages in the software
industry and is often regarded as “the programming language
of the Cloud” [2]. Many popular cloud systems, such as
the software container platform Docker [3] and the cluster
manager Kubernetes [4], are written in Go.
Go is designed with concurrency in mind. Its designers
aim to make concurrent programming easier and less error-
prone by introducing two built-in concurrency constructs, i.e.,
goroutines and channels. Goroutines are lightweight threads
managed by the Go runtime. Channels provide CSP-style mes-
sage passing mechanisms [5]–[7] for communication between
goroutines. Although traditional shared memory concurrency
is also available, channel-based mechanisms are strongly rec-
ommended instead. It was believed that communication via
message passing can make concurrent programming simpler
and more reliable. However, recent surveys [8], [9] show that
channel-based mechanisms introduce as much, if not more,
concurrency bugs than traditional shared memory mechanisms.
Go provides a rich set of concurrency primitives. Mixing
traditional locking and channel-based message passing mech-
anisms has introduced Go-speciﬁc bugs (e.g., communication
∗Corresponding authors.
deadlocks and channel misuse). For instance, communication
deadlocks caused by channels account for more than 50% of
deadlock bugs in Go applications [8], [9], but this problem
was often overlooked in the past. On the other hand, the Go
language and its associated tooling only provide only a basic
solution for detecting concurrency bugs, including a runtime
race detector and a toy global deadlock detector exist. While
techniques and tools [10]–[14] have recently been proposed to
detect concurrency bugs in Go, much needs to be done.
We believe that a benchmark suite can be instrumental
in helping researchers understand well concurrency bugs in
Go and develop effective tools for their detection. Hence,
GOBENCH . To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
benchmark suite for Go concurrency bugs. There are two
test suites, a real test suite, G OREAL, consisting of 82 real-
world concurrency bugs, and a kernel test suite, G OKER,
consisting of 103 extracted bug kernels. These bugs cover a
variety of concurrency bugs, especially Go-speciﬁc bugs, such
as communication deadlocks and channel misuse.
For G OREAL, its 82 bugs are taken from 9 popular real-
world Go applications. For each bug, we have created a Docker
image to expose it on a single host machine using a go test
command or a test script written by the original developers (for
a complex bug) to ensure portability and reproducibility.
For G OKER, we have created 103 bug kernels representing
103 bugs (one bug per kernel), with 67 selected from the
82 bugs in G OREAL and 36 selected from a recent study on
Go concurrency bugs [9]. How and why these selections are
made will be explained later in the paper. For each bug kernel,
we have extracted and simpliﬁed its bug-relevant code from
its corresponding source code, by preserving its bug-inducing
complexities (e.g., the root cause and the bug-triggering calling
sequence) as much as possible. As all the bug kernels can be
compiled normally, no test scripts need to be provided.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We introduce G OBENCH , the ﬁrst benchmark suite
to facilitate understanding and detecting concurrency
bugs in Go. G OBENCH is publicly available at
https://github.com/timmyyuan/gobench.
• We introduce a new taxonomy of Go concurrency bugs
according to their Go-speciﬁc root causes, providing
guidelines behind the development of G OBENCH .
978-1-7281-8613-9/21 c⃝ 2021 IEEE CGO 2021, Virtual, Republic of Korea
Accepted for publication by IEEE. c⃝ 2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/
republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
187

--- PAGE 2 ---
• We have evaluated a range of representative tools for
ﬁnding Go concurrency bugs using G OBENCH . Our eval-
uation has revealed their limitations and provided insights
for developing improved bug-detection tools.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews concurrency constructs in Go and examines different
types of concurrency bugs using examples. Section III intro-
duces G OBENCH . Section IV evaluates existing concurrency
bug-detection tools using GoBench. Section V reviews the
related work and Section VI concludes the paper.
II. B ACKGROUND
Go is a statically typed, compiled programming language
designed for concurrent programming. It offers a rich set
of concurrency primitives, supporting both CSP-style concur-
rency and traditional shared memory mechanisms. The rich
set of concurrency primitives not only facilitates concurrent
programming but also bring in many concurrency bugs. In
this section, we brieﬂy introduce common concurrency mech-
anisms in Go and illustrate different types of concurrency bugs.
A. Goroutine
Goroutine is the concurrency unit in Go, a lightweight
thread managed by the Go runtime. Unlike system threads,
goroutines are cheaper to create. It is common to have hun-
dreds of thousands of goroutines running on a single machine.
We can create a goroutine, by adding simply the keyword
go before a function call, to run it concurrently with other
functions. In practice, goroutines are often created using
anonymous functions, declared in other functions. All local
variables declared before an anonymous function are accessi-
ble inside. These variables are potentially shared between a
parent goroutine and a child goroutine executing the anony-
mous function, resulting potentially in Go-speciﬁc data races.
B. Concurrency Primitives
Table I summarizes the basic synchronization primitives in
Go. These can be used in shared-memory and message-passing
concurrency. Those for shared-memory are packaged in the
sync library, including mutual exclusive locks (i.e., Mutex
and RWMutex), conditional variables (i.e., Cond), and atomic
memory operations (i.e., atomic). These constructs are also
available in languages such as Java and C/C++. Once is a new
primitive to guarantee that a function is only executed once.
When Once.Do(foo) is invoked multiple times, foo is
executed only for the ﬁrst invocation. Waitgroup is similar
to thread join, where a goroutine can be used to wait for a set
of goroutines in the Waitgroup to ﬁnish.
For message-passing, Go uses statically-typed channels to
send and receive messages across the goroutines. Channels
can be buffered or unbuffered. Buffered channels are asyn-
chronous. Thus, sending (receiving) operations to a buffered
channel will not block unless the buffer is full (empty). On the
other hand, the sender (receiver) of an unbuffered channel will
block if there is no corresponding receiver (sender) available.
A channel can be set to nil or closed. Receiving messages
TABLE I
CONCURRENCY PRIMITIVES IN GO.
Model Primitive Semantic
Shared
memory
Mutex a mutual exclusive lock
RWMutex a reader/writer lock
atomic an atomic memory operation
Cond a condition variable
Once exactly one action per object
WaitGroup waiting for multiple
goroutines to ﬁnish
Message
passing
chan a channel for exchanging data
between concurrent goroutines
select waiting on multiple channel
operations
from a closed channel will get an empty response immediately
and receiving messages from a nil channel will block the
receiver forever. Moreover, a new switch-like select
statement can be used for communication across the multiple
channels. A select statement waits for multiple channels,
blocking until it can use one of its waited channels (non-
deterministically) or when it can execute a default case.
This rich set of concurrency primitives enables high-level
concurrency patterns to be implemented in multiple ways.
However, misuse of these primitives often leads to concurrency
bugs, as evident in this paper and previous studies [8], [9].
C. Concurrency Bugs
Following [8], [9], [15], we classify Go concurrency bugs
into blocking and non-blocking bugs. We can further differ-
entiate bugs in each category according to their root causes.
1) Blocking Bugs: These include (a) resource deadlocks
(due to misuse of locks), (b) communication deadlocks (due to
misuse of synchronization or channels), (c) mixed deadlocks
(due to, e.g., misuse of both locks and channels). The former
two are the two main sources of deadlocks [15]–[18]. A
goroutine leak occurs when it waits to receive messages from
a channel (post to a channel) forever, as no sender (receiver)
is available. Without loss of generality, we consider goroutine
leaks as a special case of blocking bugs.
a) Resource Deadlocks: A resource deadlock occurs
when a set of goroutines block each other where each is wait-
ing for resources held by some others in the set. Traditional
resource deadlocks, such as double locking or acquiring locks
in conﬂict orders ( AB-BA deadlock ), have been well studied
and can be detected with existing techniques [19]–[23].
In Go, there are Go-speciﬁc resource deadlocks. For a read-
write lock, RWMutex, a write lock request is given a higher
priority than a read lock request and a goroutine can acquire
the same read lock multiple times without causing double
locking. Therefore, a new type of resource deadlocks can result
when a goroutine ( G1) tries to acquire a write lock between
the two read lock requests from another goroutine ( G2). G1’s
write lock request will be blocked since G2 has already held a
read lock. However, G2’s second read lock request will also be
blocked since G1’s write lock request has a higher priority. For
convenience, such deadlocks are referred to asRWR deadlocks.
188