=== FILE: 09_gcatch.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Automatically Detecting and Fixing Concurrency Bugs in Go
Software Systems
Ziheng Liu
Pennsylvania State University
USA
Shuofei Zhu
Pennsylvania State University
USA
Boqin Qin
Beijing Univ. of Posts and Telecom.
China
Hao Chen
University of California, Davis
USA
Linhai Song
Pennsylvania State University
USA
ABSTRACT
Go is a statically typed programming language designed for efficient
and reliable concurrent programming. For this purpose, Go provides
lightweight goroutines and recommends passing messages using
channels as a less error-prone means of thread communication.
Go has become increasingly popular in recent years and has been
adopted to build many important infrastructure software systems.
However, a recent empirical study shows that concurrency bugs,
especially those due to misuse of channels, exist widely in Go. These
bugs severely hurt the reliability of Go concurrent systems.
To fight Go concurrency bugs caused by misuse of channels,
this paper proposes a static concurrency bug detection system,
GCatch, and an automated concurrency bug fixing system, GFix.
After disentangling an input Go program, GCatch models the com-
plex channel operations in Go using a novel constraint system and
applies a constraint solver to identify blocking bugs. GFix auto-
matically patches blocking bugs detected by GCatch using Go’s
channel-related language features. We apply GCatch and GFix to 21
popular Go applications, including Docker, Kubernetes, and gRPC.
In total, GCatch finds 149 previously unknown blocking bugs due
to misuse of channels and GFix successfully fixes 124 of them. We
have reported all detected bugs and generated patches to develop-
ers. So far, developers have fixed 125 blocking misuse-of-channel
bugs based on our reporting. Among them, 87 bugs are fixed by
applying GFix’s patches directly.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Software and its engineering → Software testing and de-
bugging; Software reliability.
KEYWORDS
Go; Concurrency Bugs; Bug Detection; Bug Fixing; Static Analysis
ACM Reference Format:
Ziheng Liu, Shuofei Zhu, Boqin Qin, Hao Chen, and Linhai Song. 2021. Auto-
matically Detecting and Fixing Concurrency Bugs in Go Software Systems.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’21, April 19–23, 2021, Virtual, MI, USA
© 2021 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8317-2/21/04. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3445814.3446756
In Proceedings of the 26th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’21),
April 19–23, 2021, Virtual, MI, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3445814.3446756
1 INTRODUCTION
Go is a statically typed programming language designed by Google
in 2009 [13]. In recent years, Go has gained increasing popularity in
building software in production environments. These Go programs
range from libraries [5] and command-line tools [1, 6] to systems
software, including container systems [12, 22], databases [3, 8], and
blockchain systems [16].
One major design goal of Go is to provide an efficient and safe
way for developers to write concurrent programs [14]. To achieve
this purpose, Go provides easily created lightweight threads (called
goroutines); it also advocates the use of channels to explicitly
pass messages across goroutines, on the assumption that message-
passing concurrency is less error-prone than shared-memory con-
currency supported by traditional programming languages [24, 31,
69]. In addition, Go also provides several unique primitives and
libraries for concurrent programming.
Unfortunately, Go programs still contain many concurrency
bugs [77], the type of bugs that are most difficult to debug [30, 53]
and severely hurt the reliability of multi-threaded software sys-
tems [15, 78]. Moreover, a recent empirical study [87] shows that
message passing is just as error-prone as shared memory, and that
misuse of channels is even more likely to cause blocking bugs (e.g.,
deadlock) than misuse of mutexes.
A previously unknown concurrency bug in Docker is shown
in Figure 1. Function Exec() creates a child goroutine at line 5
to duplicate the content of a.Reader. After the duplication, the
child goroutine sends err to the parent goroutine through channel
outDone to notify the parent about completion and any possible er-
ror (line 7). SinceoutDone is an unbuffered channel (line 3), the child
blocks at line 7 until the parent receives from outDone. Meanwhile,
the parent blocks at the select at line 9 until it either receives err
from the child (line 10) or receives a message fromctx.Done() (line
13), indicating the entire task can be halted. If the message from
ctx.Done() arrives earlier, or if the two messages arrive concur-
rently and Go’s runtime non-deterministically chooses the second
case to execute, the parent will return from function Exec(). No
other goroutine can pull messages from outDone, leaving the child
goroutine permanently blocked at line 7.

--- PAGE 2 ---
ASPLOS ’21, April 19–23, 2021, Virtual, MI, USA Ziheng Liu, Shuofei Zhu, Boqin Qin, Hao Chen, and Linhai Song
1 func Exec(ctx context.Context, ...) (ExResult, error) {
2 var oBuf, eBuf bytes.Buffer
3 - outDone := make(chan error )
4 + outDone := make(chan error , 1)
5 go func() {
6 _, err = StdCopy(&oBuf, &eBuf, a.Reader)
7 outDone <- err // block
8 }()
9 select {
10 case err := <-outDone:
11 if err != nil {
12 return ExecResult{}, err }
13 case <-ctx.Done():
14 return ExecResult{}, ctx.Err()
15 }
16 return ExResult{oBuf: &oBuf, eBuf: &eBuf}, nil
17 }
Figure 1: A previously unknown Docker bug and its patch.
This bug demonstrates the complexity of Go’s concurrency fea-
tures. Programmers have to have a good understanding of when
a channel operation blocks and how select waits for multiple
channel operations. Otherwise, it is easy for them to make similar
mistakes when programming Go. Since Go is being widely adopted,
it is increasingly urgent to fight concurrency bugs in Go, especially
those caused by misuse of channels, since Go advocates using chan-
nels for thread communication and many developers choose Go
because of its good support for channels [72, 86].
However, existing techniques cannot effectively detect channel-
related concurrency bugs in large Go software systems. First, con-
currency bug detection techniques designed for classic program-
ming languages [ 49, 58, 67, 68, 75, 82] mainly focus on analyz-
ing shared-memory accesses or shared-memory primitives. Thus,
they cannot detect bugs caused by misuse of channels in Go. Sec-
ond, since message-passing operations in MPI are different from
those in Go, techniques designed for detecting deadlocks in MPI
programs [38, 41, 42, 83, 88] cannot be applied to Go programs.
Third, the three concurrency bug detectors released by the Go
team [9, 11, 19] cover only limited buggy code patterns and cannot
identify the majority of Go concurrency bugs in the real world [87].
Fourth, although recent techniques can use model checking to
identify blocking bugs in Go [39, 59, 60, 70, 80], those techniques
analyze each input program and all its synchronization primitives
as a whole. Due to the exponential complexity of model check-
ing, those techniques can handle only small programs with a few
primitives, and cannot scale to large systems software containing
millions of lines of code and hundreds of primitives (e.g., Docker,
Kubernetes).
In this paper, we propose GCatch, a static detection system that
can effectively and accurately identify concurrency bugs in large
Go systems software. As shown in Figure 2, GCatch focuses on
blocking misuse-of-channel (BMOC) bugs (“BMOC Detector” in
Figure 2), since the majority of channel-related concurrency bugs
in Go are blocking bugs [87]. GCatch also contains five additional
detectors (“Traditional Detectors” in Figure 2) that rely on ideas ef-
fective at discovering concurrency bugs in traditional programming
languages.
The design of GCatch comprises two steps. To scale to large Go
software, GCatch conducts reachability analysis to compute the
Dispatcher
Patcher-1
Traditional 
Detectors 
BMOC 
Detector
GFixGCatch
Patcher-2
Patcher-3
BMOC
BugsGo Source 
Code
Patched 
Code
All Detected 
Bugs 
Figure 2: The workflow of GCatch and GFix.
relationship between synchronization primitives of an input pro-
gram, and leverages that relationship to disentangle the primitives
into small groups. GCatch inspects each group only in a small pro-
gram scope. To detect BMOC bugs, GCatch enumerates execution
paths for all goroutines executed in a small program scope, uses
constraints to precisely describe how synchronization operations
proceed and block, and invokes Z3 [33] to search for possible exe-
cutions that would lead some synchronization operations to block
forever (thereby detecting blocking bugs).
The key challenge of building GCatch lies in modeling channel
operations using constraints. Since a channel’s behavior depends
on its states (e.g., the number of elements in the channel, closed
or not), channel operations are much more complex to model than
the synchronization operations ( e.g., locking/unlocking) already
covered in existing constraint systems [45, 48, 57, 90]. We model
channel operations by associating each channel with state variables
and defining how to update state variables when a channel opera-
tion proceeds. Our constraint system is the first to consider states
of synchronization primitives. It is very different from existing con-
straint systems and models used in the previous model checking
techniques [39, 59, 60, 70, 80].
A BMOC bug will continue to hurt the system’s reliability until
it is fixed. Thus, we further design an automated concurrency bug
fixing system (GFix) to patch BMOC bugs detected by GCatch (Fig-
ure 2). GFix first conducts static analysis to categorize input BMOC
bugs into three groups. It then automatically increases channel
buffer sizes or uses keyword “defer” or “select” to change block-
ing channel operations to be non-blocking and fix bugs in each
group. One challenge of automated bug fixing is generating read-
able patches that will be more readily accepted by developers. GFix
synthesizes patches using Go’s channel-related language features,
which are powerful and already frequently used by programmers.
Thus, GFix’s patches only change a few lines of code and align
with programmers’ usual practice. They are easily validated and
accepted by developers.
The bug and its patch shown in Figure 1 confirm the effectiveness
of GCatch and GFix. After inspecting Docker, GCatch identifies
the previously unknown bug by reporting that when the parent
goroutine chooses the second case, the child goroutine endless
blocks at line 7, which is the correct root cause of the bug. GFix
changes one line of code to increase outDone’s buffer size from
zero to one, which successfully fixes the bug. We submitted the
bug and the patch to Docker developers. They directly applied our
patch in a more recent Docker version.
We evaluate GCatch and GFix on 21 popular real-world Go soft-
ware systems including Docker, Kubernetes, and gRPC. In total,
GCatch finds 149 previously unknown BMOC bugs and reports 51
false positives. We reported all detected bugs to developers. So far,
125 BMOC bugs have been fixed based on our reporting. The largest
application used in our evaluation (Kubernetes) contains more than
three million lines of code. GCatch can finish examining it in 25.6