=== FILE: 10_gfuzz.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Who Goes First?
Detecting Go Concurrency Bugs via Message Reordering
Ziheng Liu
Pennsylvania State University
USA
Shihao Xia∗
Pennsylvania State University
USA
Yu Liang
Pennsylvania State University
USA
Linhai Song
Pennsylvania State University
USA
Hong Hu
Pennsylvania State University
USA
ABSTRACT
Go is a young programming language invented to build safe and
efficient concurrent programs. It provides goroutines as lightweight
threads and channels for inter-goroutine communication. Program-
mers are encouraged to explicitly pass messages through channels
to connect goroutines, with the purpose of reducing the chance of
making programming mistakes and introducing concurrency bugs.
Go is one of the most beloved programming languages and has
already been used to build many critical infrastructure software
systems in the data-center environment. However, a recent study
shows that channel-related concurrency bugs are still common in
Go programs, severely hurting the reliability of the programs.
This paper presents GFuzz, a dynamic detector that can effec-
tively pinpoint channel-related concurrency bugs by mutating the
processing orders of concurrent messages. We build GFuzz in three
steps. We first adopt an effective approach to identify concurrent
messages and transform a program to process those messages in
any given order. We then take a fuzzing approach to generate new
processing orders by mutating exercised ones and rely on execu-
tion feedback to prioritize orders close to triggering bugs. Finally,
we design a runtime sanitizer to capture triggered bugs that are
missed by the Go runtime. We evaluate GFuzz on seven popular Go
software systems, including Docker, Kubernetes, and gRPC. GFuzz
finds 184 previously unknown bugs and reports a negligible num-
ber of false positives. Programmers have already confirmed 124
reports as real bugs and fixed 67 of them based on our reporting.
A careful inspection of the detected concurrency bugs from gRPC
shows the effectiveness of each component of GFuzz and confirms
the components’ rationality.
CCS CONCEPTS
· Software and its engineering → Software testing and de-
bugging; Software reliability.
∗Shihao Xia contributed equally with Ziheng Liu in this work.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ASPLOS ’22, February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9205-1/22/02. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3503222.3507753
KEYWORDS
Go; Concurrency Bugs; Bug Detection; Dynamic Analysis; Fuzzing
ACM Reference Format:
Ziheng Liu, Shihao Xia, Yu Liang, Linhai Song, and Hong Hu. 2022. Who
Goes First? Detecting Go Concurrency Bugs via Message Reordering. In
Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’22), February 28
ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
15 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3503222.3507753
1 INTRODUCTION
Go is an industrial programming language invented by Google,
meant for building safe and efficient concurrent programs [ 73]. In
recent years, Go’s popularity has increased dramatically, making
it one of the most beloved and one of the most wanted program-
ming languages [
54]. Programmers have already adopted Go to
build important infrastructure software, such as Docker [ 11], Ku-
bernetes [36], and gRPC [ 20].
To facilitate multi-threaded programming, Go offers several built-
in features, like goroutines and channels. A goroutine is a light-
weight thread that can be created and reused efficiently in the user
space, while a channel is a message-passing primitive for com-
munication between different goroutines. Go programmers are
encouraged to use channels instead of shared memory to connect
concurrent goroutines, as explicit message passing is commonly
believed to be more resistant to concurrency bugs [ 15, 22, 65].
Unfortunately, concurrent Go programs are still difficult for pro-
grammers to think through and program correctly. Concurrency
bugs, which are notoriously difficult to debug [ 8, 34], are still com-
mon in Go programs [ 58, 68]. A recent empirical study counter-
intuitively reveals that incorrect message passing contributes to
a significant proportion of Go concurrency bugs, and misuse of
channels can be more likely to cause such bugs under certain cir-
cumstances than misuse of traditional primitives ( e.g., mutexes)
that protect shared-memory accesses [ 68].
Existing bug-detection techniques cannot effectively discover Go
concurrency bugs, especially those due to wrong message passing.
The main reason is that most existing methods are built for tradi-
tional programming languages ( e.g., C/C++, Java), and they only
monitor shared-memory primitives and shared-memory accesses
[3, 4, 12, 29ś32, 35, 40, 40, 42, 50ś52, 55, 56, 60]. They can neither
handle message-passing primitives ( e.g., channels) nor detect any
message-passing-related bugs. Existing model-checking techniques
can systematically examine all possible message orders to pinpoint
888

--- PAGE 2 ---
ASPLOS ’22, February 28 ś March 4, 2022, Lausanne, Switzerland Ziheng Liu, Shihao Xia, Yu Liang, Linhai Song, and Hong Hu
1 // go parent()
2 func parent() { // parent goroutine
3 ... // initialize object daemon
4 ch, errCh := daemon.discoveryWatcher.Watch()
5 select {
6 case <- Fire(1 * time.Second):
7 Log("Timeout!")
8 case e := <-ch:
9 if !reflect.DeepEqual(e, expected) {
10 Log("Unexpected!")
11 }
12 case e := <-errCh:
13 Log("Error!")
14 }
15 return
16 }
17 func (s *Discovery) Watch() (chan discovery.Entries, chan error ) {
18 - ch := make(chan discovery.Entries)
19 - errCh := make(chan error )
20 + ch := make(chan discovery.Entries, 1)
21 + errCh := make(chan error , 1)
22 go func() { // child goroutine
23 entries, err := s.fetch()
24 if err != nil {
25 errCh <- err
26 } else {
27 ch <- entries
28 } ...
29 }()
30 return ch, errCh
31 }
Figure 1: A Blocking Bug in Docker and Its Patch. The code
has been simplified for illustration purposes.
bugs in distributed systems [ 39, 48, 74]. However, since only very
few message orders can lead to concurrency bugs, exhaustively in-
specting all message orders is not efficient to detect channel-related
bugs in Go programs. We can also find several bug detectors built
for Go. However, the static detectors either cover a limited num-
ber of buggy code patterns [
16, 28], fail to scale to large, real Go
programs [14, 37, 38, 53, 59], or report significant numbers of false
positives and false negatives due to imprecise alias analysis [ 45].
The dynamic detectors for Go merely report concurrency bugs
triggered in a given execution [ 7, 18, 21, 69]. Without the capabil-
ity to alter programs’ execution states and increase the chance of
exposing bugs, these dynamic detectors miss many concurrency
bugs [68].
Figure 1 shows a channel-related1 concurrency bug from Docker.
The parent goroutine calls an object method through an indirect
call at line 4. The callee is actually function Watch() at lines 17ś31.
Watch() creates two unbuffered channels ch and errCh at lines
18 and 19 firstly, then starts a child goroutine at line 22, and fi-
nally returns the two channels at line 30. The child goroutine calls
s.fetch() at line 23. It checks the return value and sends a mes-
sage either to channel errCh at line 25 or to channel ch at line 27.
Meanwhile, the parent goroutine blocks at the select statement at
lines 5ś14 until it either receives a message from Fire() after one
second or from one of the two returned channels. If the message
from
Fire() comes first, the parent goroutine chooses the first
case, which merely logs the timeout and returns. After that, no
other goroutines have references to channel ch or channel errCh,
1We use łchannel-related bugž and łmessage-passing-related bugž interchangeably, as
most message-passing-related bugs are due to misuse of channels [ 45, 68].
and thus no goroutines can receive messages from the two chan-
nels anymore. Since both of the channels are unbuffered, the child
goroutine blocks at one of the sending operations (line 25 or line
27) endlessly.
This example demonstrates the difficulty in detecting Go con-
currency bugs related to channels. The bug only manifests when
1 the message from Fire() at line 6 arrives earlier than the other
two messages, so that the select proceeds with the first case.
Meanwhile, the detector should be able to infer that 2 no other
goroutines have references to ch or errCh and can unblock the
child goroutine. Static techniques cannot effectively infer the tar-
gets of indirect calls, like the one at line 4, and thus they cannot
determine whether the child goroutine can be unblocked (condition
2 ). In offline testing, we notice that the message fromFire() never
comes first and thus current dynamic methods will miss the bug
due to the lack of condition 1 .
In this paper, we propose a new dynamic-analysis tool, GFuzz,
to effectively detect channel-related Go concurrency bugs. We con-
sider both blocking bugs, where one or more goroutines are stuck
in their executions, and non-blocking bugs, where all goroutines
can finish but generate undesired results ( e.g., panics) [68]. GFuzz
focuses on concurrent messages that are unique to the Go program-
ming language. Since the processing order of these messages is
non-deterministic by design, programmers must guarantee a Go
program works well under all possible processing orders. However,
due to the huge number of possible orders, programmers with lim-
ited time and energy are prone to missing some orders, which may
bring in channel-related bugs.
Guided by this intuition, GFuzz intentionally mutates the or-
der of concurrent messages to direct tested programs to different
execution states and increases the chance of triggering both block-
ing bugs and non-blocking bugs. Meanwhile, it monitors program
executions to capture triggered blocking bugs that are (largely)
undetected by the Go runtime
2. Take Figure 1 as an example. In
theory, the message at line 6 could arrive before the ones at line 8
and line 12 or after them. No matter the order, the code should work
in both scenarios. However, the programmer does not account for
the first scenario, thereby introducing the aforementioned bug into
this example. By intentionally mutating the message order, GFuzz
can inspect both scenarios and detect the bug.
Although reordering concurrent messages is straightforward,
we need to tackle three challenges to build a practical bug detector.
First, how to identify concurrent messages? Without precise
information about concurrent messages, GFuzz may enforce a mes-
sage order that conflicts with an existing happens-before relation,
leading to a false deadlock that would never happen in real exe-
cutions. To answer this question, we adopt a simple method that
considers messages waited for by the sameselect statement. Chan-
nel operations under the same select can happen simultaneously,
and thus their messages are concurrent. Moreover, mutating the
order of these messages preserves the program semantics and en-
sures the alteration of program execution ( i.e., different exercised
cases). To enforce a given message order, GFuzz transforms each
select in a way that a particular case is preferred over all others.
2The Go runtime can capture triggered channel-related non-blocking bugs.
889