=== FILE: 11_gopie.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Effective Concurrency Testing for Go via Directional
Primitive-constrained Interleaving Exploration
Zongze Jiang 1†, Ming Wen 1†∗, Yixin Yang1†, Chao Peng 3, Ping Yang 3, Hai Jin 2†
1School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
2School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
3ByteDance, Beijing, China
Email: {jiangzongze, mwenaa, yangyixin, hjin }@hust.edu.cn, {pengchao.x, yangping.cser}@bytedance.com
Abstract—The Go language (Go/Golang) has been attracting
increasing attention from the industry over recent years due to
its strong concurrency support and ease of deployment. This
programming language encourages developers to use channel-
based concurrency, which simplifies the development of concurrent
programs. Unfortunately, it also introduces new concurrency
problems that differ from those caused by the mechanism of
shared memory concurrency. However, there are only few works
that aim to detect such Go-specific concurrency issues. Even
state-of-the-art testing tools will miss critical concurrent bugs
that require fine-grained and effective interleaving exploration.
This paper presents GoPie, a novel testing approach for
detecting Go concurrency bugs through primitive-constrained
interleaving exploration. GoPie utilizes execution histories to
identify new interleavings instead of relying on exhaustive
exploration or random scheduling. To evaluate its performance,
we applied GoPie to existing benchmarks and large-scale open-
source projects. Results show that GoPie can effectively explore
concurrent interleavings and detect significantly more bugs in
the benchmark. Furthermore, it uncovered 11 unique previously
unknown concurrent bugs, and 9 of which have been confirmed.
Index Terms—Go, Concurrency Testing, Fuzzing
I. I NTRODUCTION
The Go language offers two concurrency mechanisms:
Communicating Sequential Processes (CSP) and traditional
ones based on shared memory. CSP is a concurrency model
in Go that enables the communication between independent
processes based on channels. A channel acts as a pipeline
to connect different processes, allowing them to coordinate
different tasks and share data. The usage of channels makes
the complex synchronization operations transparent to users,
making it easier to implement concurrent programs than
other programming languages without such built-in supports.
Consequently, since its open source in 2009, the Go language
has consistently grown in popularity. However, recent works [1],
[2], [ 3] have shown that the utilization of channels does
not eliminate concurrency bugs. Concurrency bugs are still
pervasive due to the insufficient understanding of such new
mechanisms, which can lead to resource leaks and global/partial
deadlocks, thus eventually leading to severe consequences for
† Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering
Research Center on Big Data Security, National Engineering Research Center
for Big Data Technology and System, Services Computing Technology and
System Lab, Cluster and Grid Computing Lab.∗ Corresponding author
1 type statusManager struct {
2 podStatusesLock sync.Mutex
3 podStatusChannel chan bool
4 // ...
5 }
6
7 func(s *statusManager)Start() {
8 for i:=0; i<2;i++{
9 <-s.podStatusChannel
10 s.podStatusesLock.Lock()
11 // handle the pod status here
12 s.podStatusesLock.Unlock()
13 }
14 }
15
16 func(s *statusManager)SetPodStatus() {
17 s.podStatusesLock.Lock()
18 // send the pod status below
19 s.podStatusChannel <- true
20 s.podStatusesLock.Unlock()
21 }
22
23 func main(){
24 s := & statusManager{podStatusChannel:
make(chan bool )} // unbuffered
25 go s.Start() // G1
26 go s.SetPodStatus() // G2
27 go s.SetPodStatus() // G3
28 }
Fig. 1: A Mixed Deadlock Concurrency Bug in Kubernetes.
The Misuse of Channel with the Mutex Leads to the Deadlock.
end-users. Therefore, effective detection of channel-related
concurrency bugs in Go automatically is in urgent demand.
Unfortunately, existing testing techniques are ineffective
in discovering concurrency bugs in Go programs. We first
introduce a real example, and then elaborate on how existing
techniques are limited. Fig. 1 shows a deadlock bug from
Kubernetes [1] caused by the misuse of channel and lock (the
code is simplified for clarity). Specifically, it implements a
function to manage the status of Pods. The code first defines a
type (similar to structure/class in C/C++) of statusManager,
which contains two key methods, Start and SetPodStatus.
The two methods communicate through a shared unbuffered
channel ( podStatusChannel) and mutex ( podStatusLock)
(see such concurrency semantics in Section II-A).
The problem with the code is, with special concurrency
execution orders, i.e., interleaving, the thread G3 created at
L27 can hold the lock at L17 while waiting for the data sent

--- PAGE 2 ---
to the unbuffered channel at L19. However, the thread G1
created at L25 which can receive from the unbuffered channel
is blocking at L10 since it tries to acquire the lock at the
same time. Consequently, a deadlock happens, resulting in the
non-termination of both G1 and G3 as well as resource leaks
(see Section II-B for more detail).
For the conventional fuzzing techniques [ 4], [ 5], they are
limited since merely generating program inputs (e.g., input
from stdin, network or files) cannot trigger this bug. Instead,
uncovering the deadlock requires enforcing specific interleaving.
Several previous works have also proposed methods to search
the interleaving spaces to detect concurrency bugs (e.g., the
concurrency bug detection tools designed for other languages
such as C/C++ [ 6], [7], Java [ 8], [9] and C# [ 10]). However,
they cannot be directly applied to detect Go concurrency
bugs effectively. First, they are often designed to detect
memory access issues such as data races instead of channel-
related problems that we are concerned about. Second, they
cannot explore the interleaving of channel-related primitives
in Go. There are few testing approaches specifically designed
for Go targeting on the channel-related bugs. For instance,
GoAT [11] utilizes random delay injection before all channel-
related operations to explore diverse interleavings. However,
recent works [ 12], [ 13] show that the random strategy is
ineffective because it is hard to cover specific interleavings.
The state-of-the-art fuzzing approach for Go, GFuzz [ 14],
demonstrates promising performance by performing directional
scheduling via message reordering. However, it only explores
the interleavings based on the select statements, thus may
missing important concurrency bugs that are related to other
Go primitives.
To solve these problems, we propose a novel scheduling ap-
proach to explore interleavings for Go effectively. In particular,
it aims to achieve directional (cover specific interleavings
each time), general (supporting multiple primitives), and
fine-grained (at the operation-level) scheduling to detect
concurrency bugs for Go. However, effectively achieving such
a goal poses the following significant challenges.
First, systematically scheduling the orders of operations on
diverse primitives is non-trivial . GoAT [11] utilizes bounded
random delay injection [ 15] before all channel-related opera-
tions to explore diverse interleavings. With the specific focus on
the code element of select, GFuzz can explore the interleaving
space via reordering the concurrency-related operations inside
select effectively. However, the scheduling method of GFuzz
cannot be generalized to other primitives such as sync.Mutex.
To address the challenge of precisely scheduling the orders of
diverse concurrent primitives in Go, we integrate the idea of
exploring interleavings via conventional controlled concurrency
testing (e.g., [ 16], [17], [18], [19]) with Go’s unique features
and propose a new scheduling method driven by scheduling
chains. Scheduling chains are constrained by primitives and
generated based on certain heuristic rules. Different scheduling
chains indicate diverse directions to explore new interleavings.
The scheduling component instrumented into the concurrent
programs will force the execution to follow target directions.
Second, recognizing scheduling sites and generating effective
scheduling chains (see Section III-A) are challenging . With
certain domain knowledge, we can identify suitable scheduling
chains for small concurrent programs efficiently, but it is
impractical for large-scale open-source programs such as k8s
and etcd. Exploring exhaustively is infeasible for two main
reasons. First, the number of interleavings among different
primitives can increase exponentially with the increase of
primitive operations. Second, the interleavings contain a high
degree of duplication, and therefore exploring them exhaustively
can waste time and resources, thus being ineffective [ 12], [13],
[20]. To address such a challenge, we propose a novel feedback-
guided testing approach to generate effective scheduling chains.
The insight of scheduling chain generation is to learn from
both the valueless interleavings and the opportunity of finding
new interleavings from existing execution histories. Once
the knowledge has been gained, we utilize several primitive-
constrained heuristics to infer and explore new interleavings.
We implement our idea as a tool, GoPie, which can achieve
effective concurrency testing for Go via Primitive-constrained
Interleaving Exploration. We performed experiments on the
Go-specific concurrency benchmark, GoBench [ 1], as well as
well-known real-world open-source Go projects. Via extensive
evaluations, we found that GoPie is effective and scalable,
which can detect more types of concurrency bugs on the
GoBench than the existing state-of-the-art baselines. Besides,
it has identified 11 unique previous unknown bugs in the open-
source projects, 9 of them have been confirmed and 7 of them
have been fixed. In addition, the ablation study shows that each
component of our design in GoPie contributes significantly
to its promising performance.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper are:
• Originality: We provide a new method that can perform
directional, general, and fine-grained scheduling supporting
multiple primitives for Go concurrency bug detection.
• Effectiveness: We conducted extensive experiments on the
benchmark, GoBench, as well as large-scale open-source
projects. The results show that our approach is effective and
can outperform the state-of-the-art baselines.
• Usefulness: Our tool has uncovered 19 previously unknown
blocking instances in large-scale open source projects. We
filed such blockings as 11 unique bug reports, among which
9 have been confirmed and 7 have been fixed.
• Artifact: We implemented our tool as GoPie. The tool as
well as the experimental data is available at https://github.
com/CGCL-codes/GoPie to facilitate future studies.
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Concurrency Primitives of Golang
In Go, concurrency primitives are language features that
enable concurrent programming. The following describes some
of the most commonly used concurrency primitives in Go [ 21]:
Goroutines: Goroutines, or routines, are lightweight threads
that are used to enable concurrent execution of code in Go.
Unlike threads in other languages, goroutines are not mapped to