=== FILE: 12_hinton.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
arXiv:1503.02531v1  [stat.ML]  9 Mar 2015
Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network
Geoffrey Hinton∗ †
Google Inc.
Mountain View
geoffhinton@google.com
Oriol Vinyals†
Google Inc.
Mountain View
vinyals@google.com
Jeff Dean
Google Inc.
Mountain View
jeff@google.com
Abstract
A very simple way to improve the performance of almost any mac hine learning
algorithm is to train many different models on the same data a nd then to average
their predictions [3]. Unfortunately, making predictions using a whole ensemble
of models is cumbersome and may be too computationally expensive to allow de-
ployment to a large number of users, especially if the individual models are large
neural nets. Caruana and his collaborators [1] have shown th at it is possible to
compress the knowledge in an ensemble into a single model whi ch is much eas-
ier to deploy and we develop this approach further using a dif ferent compression
technique. We achieve some surprising results on MNIST and w e show that we
can signiﬁcantly improve the acoustic model of a heavily used commercial system
by distilling the knowledge in an ensemble of models into a single model. We also
introduce a new type of ensemble composed of one or more full models and many
specialist models which learn to distinguish ﬁne-grained classes that the full mod-
els confuse. Unlike a mixture of experts, these specialist m odels can be trained
rapidly and in parallel.
1 Introduction
Many insects have a larval form that is optimized for extracting energy and nutrients from the envi-
ronment and a completely different adult form that is optimi zed for the very different requirements
of traveling and reproduction. In large-scale machine learning, we typically use very similar models
for the training stage and the deployment stage despite thei r very different requirements: For tasks
like speech and object recognition, training must extract structure from very large, highly redundant
datasets but it does not need to operate in real time and it can use a huge amount of computation.
Deployment to a large number of users, however, has much more stringent requirements on latency
and computational resources. The analogy with insects sugg ests that we should be willing to train
very cumbersome models if that makes it easier to extract structure from the data. The cumbersome
model could be an ensemble of separately trained models or a s ingle very large model trained with
a very strong regularizer such as dropout [9]. Once the cumbe rsome model has been trained, we
can then use a different kind of training, which we call “distillation” to transfer the knowledge from
the cumbersome model to a small model that is more suitable fo r deployment. A version of this
strategy has already been pioneered by Rich Caruana and his c ollaborators [1]. In their important
paper they demonstrate convincingly that the knowledge acq uired by a large ensemble of models
can be transferred to a single small model.
A conceptual block that may have prevented more investigation of this very promising approach is
that we tend to identify the knowledge in a trained model withthe learned parameter values and this
makes it hard to see how we can change the form of the model but keep the same knowledge. A more
abstract view of the knowledge, that frees it from any partic ular instantiation, is that it is a learned
∗ Also afﬁliated with the University of Toronto and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.
†Equal contribution.
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
mapping from input vectors to output vectors. For cumbersom e models that learn to discriminate
between a large number of classes, the normal training objec tive is to maximize the average log
probability of the correct answer, but a side-effect of the l earning is that the trained model assigns
probabilities to all of the incorrect answers and even when t hese probabilities are very small, some
of them are much larger than others. The relative probabilities of incorrect answers tell us a lot about
how the cumbersome model tends to generalize. An image of a BM W, for example, may only have
a very small chance of being mistaken for a garbage truck, but that mistake is still many times more
probable than mistaking it for a carrot.
It is generally accepted that the objective function used for training should reﬂect the true objective
of the user as closely as possible. Despite this, models are u sually trained to optimize performance
on the training data when the real objective is to generalize well to new data. It would clearly
be better to train models to generalize well, but this requir es information about the correct way to
generalize and this information is not normally available. When we are distilling the knowledge
from a large model into a small one, however, we can train the small model to generalize in the same
way as the large model. If the cumbersome model generalizes w ell because, for example, it is the
average of a large ensemble of different models, a small model trained to generalize in the same way
will typically do much better on test data than a small model that is trained in the normal way on the
same training set as was used to train the ensemble.
An obvious way to transfer the generalization ability of the cumbersome model to a small model is
to use the class probabilities produced by the cumbersome mo del as “soft targets” for training the
small model. For this transfer stage, we could use the same tr aining set or a separate “transfer” set.
When the cumbersome model is a large ensemble of simpler mode ls, we can use an arithmetic or
geometric mean of their individual predictive distributions as the soft targets. When the soft targets
have high entropy, they provide much more information per training case than hard targets and much
less variance in the gradient between training cases, so thesmall model can often be trained on much
less data than the original cumbersome model and using a much higher learning rate.
For tasks like MNIST in which the cumbersome model almost alw ays produces the correct answer
with very high conﬁdence, much of the information about the l earned function resides in the ratios
of very small probabilities in the soft targets. For example , one version of a 2 may be given a
probability of 10−6 of being a 3 and 10−9 of being a 7 whereas for another version it may be the
other way around. This is valuable information that deﬁnes a rich similarity structure over the data
(i. e. it says which 2’s look like 3’s and which look like 7’s) but it has very little inﬂuence on the
cross-entropy cost function during the transfer stage beca use the probabilities are so close to zero.
Caruana and his collaborators circumvent this problem by us ing the logits (the inputs to the ﬁnal
softmax) rather than the probabilities produced by the soft max as the targets for learning the small
model and they minimize the squared difference between the l ogits produced by the cumbersome
model and the logits produced by the small model. Our more gen eral solution, called “distillation”,
is to raise the temperature of the ﬁnal softmax until the cumbersome model produces a suitably soft
set of targets. We then use the same high temperature when training the small model to match these
soft targets. We show later that matching the logits of the cu mbersome model is actually a special
case of distillation.
The transfer set that is used to train the small model could co nsist entirely of unlabeled data [1]
or we could use the original training set. We have found that u sing the original training set works
well, especially if we add a small term to the objective funct ion that encourages the small model
to predict the true targets as well as matching the soft targe ts provided by the cumbersome model.
Typically, the small model cannot exactly match the soft tar gets and erring in the direction of the
correct answer turns out to be helpful.
2 Distillation
Neural networks typically produce class probabilities by using a “softmax” output layer that converts
the logit, zi, computed for each class into a probability, qi, by comparing zi with the other logits.
qi = exp(zi/T )
∑
j exp(zj/T ) (1)
2