=== FILE: 13_diffuse.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024
Forcing Diffuse Distributions out of Language Models
Yiming Zhang1∗, Avi Schwarzschild1, Nicholas Carlini2, Zico Kolter1,3 & Daphne Ippolito1,2
1Carnegie Mellon University
2Google DeepMind
3Bosch Center for AI
Abstract
Despite being trained specifically to follow user instructions, today’s instruction-
tuned language models perform poorly when instructed to produce random out-
puts. For example, when prompted to pick a number uniformly between one and
ten Llama-2-13B-chat disproportionately favors the number five, and when tasked
with picking a first name at random, Mistral-7B-Instruct chooses Avery 40 times
more often than we would expect based on the U.S. population. When these lan-
guage models are used for real-world tasks where diversity of outputs is crucial,
such as language model assisted dataset construction, their inability to produce
diffuse distributions over valid choices is a major hurdle. In this work, we propose
a fine-tuning method that encourages language models to output distributions that
are diffuse over valid outcomes. The methods we introduce generalize across a
variety of tasks and distributions and make large language models practical for
synthetic dataset generation with little human intervention.1
1 Introduction
Consider a Dungeon Master (DM) trying to use a language model based chatbot to assist in man-
aging their Dungeons & Dragons campaign. The DM asks the chatbot to suggest a random name
for a character in the story. The first time she asks, it suggests “Anya,” and the second time it also
suggests “Anya.” In fact, almost 40% of the time, the suggested name will be “Anya” even when
the language model is deployed with full random sampling. The DM then tries to use the chatbot
to roll a twenty-sided die; over 60% of the dice rolls come up as a 14. Frustrated, the DM gives up
and brings out their physical dice.
Instruction-tuned language models are extremely bad at producing random outputs when users
want them to. Even when prompts are carefully constructed with instructions that encourage ran-
domness, both state-of-the-art open-source and industry language models output very low-entropy
distributions over the valid options. Beyond Dungeons & Dragons, there are many practical appli-
cations where diversity across valid options is crucial for language model outputs. For example,
when language models are used to answer multiple choice or Likert-scale questions, a priori each
option should be equally likely. When language models are used for synthetic dataset construction,
such as for synthetic biographies (Maini et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2021) or instruction-tuning training
sets (Wang et al., 2023), diversity in the generations is essential but arduous to achieve through
mere prompt hacking.
In this work, we examine how far off language model generations are from user expectations of ran-
domness and diversity. While our experiments focus on instruction-tuned models such as Llama-
2-chat, our findings do generalize to pre-trained language models in general. 2 We then show how
∗Correspondence: Yiming Zhang, yimingz3@cs.cmu.edu.
1Code and data are available at https://github.com/y0mingzhang/diffuse-distributions.
2For example, when GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) is prompted with “She rolled the 20-sided die. It landed
on the number”, the output distribution is similarly far from uniform.
1
arXiv:2404.10859v2  [cs.CL]  7 Aug 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
Published as a conference paper at COLM 2024
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%Empirical probability
Gemma (baseline) Gemma (tuned) Llama-2 (baseline) Llama-2 (tuned) Mistral (baseline) Mistral (tuned)
Anya
Elara
Erin
Eleanor
Sophia
Marissa
Olivia
Marla
Morgan
Elysian
Talan
Mila
Yasmin
Dane
Samson
Hector
Kassidy
Monica
Aubrie
Kiera
Aurora
Luna
Evangeline
Elara
Arabella
Florence
Elora
Raven
Evelyn
Rowan
Alina
Karina
Lily
Zoe
Jamar
Nevaeh
Dana
Talia
Yurem
Keira
Avery
Emily
Oliver
Harper
Ella
Emma
Alice
Alexander
Olivia
Sophia
Princess
Gabriela
Natalya
Wyatt
Anika
Brennan
Talia
Yareli
Justice
Brian
(a) BABY NAMES (top 10 names are shown).
0%
20%
40%
60%Empirical probability
5 6 7 8 4 3 2 9 1 10 10 4 1 3 6 2 5 9 8 7 5 7 6 8 4 3 9 1 2 10 10 2 7 1 9 6 3 5 8 4 8 7 5 6 1 4 3 9 2 10 4 9 8 7 10 1 5 3 2 6
(b) RANDOM NUMBER GENERATION .
Figure 1: Language models do not produce diffuse probabilities. The output distributions of
untuned Gemma, Llama-2, and Mistral deviate from what we would expect from natural/random
distributions. Our tuning method addresses this by diffusing the output distribution over valid
candidates. The horizontal axes above are sorted in descending order by probability of the output.
language models can be fine-tuned to produce diffuse distributions over valid options, without
sacrificing generation quality. Our method supports tasks where the sample set of valid options
is not easily enumerated, and we show that models fine-tuned to produce diffuse probabilities for
one set of tasks generalize to other, very different tasks without degrading model utility.
This generalization allows us to promote diversity in complex settings, such as synthetic dataset
generation. On the task of generating a dataset of synthetic biographies (similar to the dataset
created by Maini et al. (2024) for benchmarking language model unlearning), our method generates
four times as many unique first names, three times as many unique birth places, and 1.5 times as
many unique careers as the untuned baseline model, all without any need for complex prompt
engineering, decoding strategy tweaking or manual re-writing.
2 Preliminaries
We begin with a formal definition of diffuse probabilities from language models . We then introduce
techniques for measuring diversity of models outputs and we show how to quantify the differences
in the observed output distributions and the desired distributions.
2.1 Problem setting
Consider a vocabulary V = {1, 2, ...,n}. An autoregressive language model takes a sequence of ℓ
tokens x ∈ Vℓ as input and outputs a probability distributionpθ(· |x) ∈ ∆(V ) over all tokens in the
vocabulary. We use ∆(V ) to denote the probability simplex over V.
In generation, we are interested in computing the probability of a potentially multi-token target
y = [y1, y2, . . . ,yn] ∈ Vn. For example, y could be a two-digit number or the biography of a
person. A language model factors the probability of a sequence y into the product of probabilities
2