=== FILE: 14_guocalib.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
On Calibration of Modern Neural Networks
Chuan Guo * 1 Geoff Pleiss * 1 Yu Sun* 1 Kilian Q. Weinberger1
Abstract
Conﬁdence calibration – the problem of predict-
ing probability estimates representative of the
true correctness likelihood – is important for
classiﬁcation models in many applications. We
discover that modern neural networks, unlike
those from a decade ago, are poorly calibrated.
Through extensive experiments, we observe that
depth, width, weight decay, and Batch Normal-
ization are important factors inﬂuencing calibra-
tion. We evaluate the performance of various
post-processing calibration methods on state-of-
the-art architectures with image and document
classiﬁcation datasets. Our analysis and exper-
iments not only offer insights into neural net-
work learning, but also provide a simple and
straightforward recipe for practical settings: on
most datasets, temperature scaling – a single-
parameter variant of Platt Scaling – is surpris-
ingly effective at calibrating predictions.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have dramatically im-
proved neural network accuracy (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; Srivastava et al., 2015; He et al., 2016; Huang et al.,
2016; 2017). As a result, neural networks are now entrusted
with making complex decisions in applications, such as ob-
ject detection (Girshick, 2015), speech recognition (Han-
nun et al., 2014), and medical diagnosis (Caruana et al.,
2015). In these settings, neural networks are an essential
component of larger decision making pipelines.
In real-world decision making systems, classiﬁcation net-
works must not only be accurate, but also should indicate
when they are likely to be incorrect. As an example, con-
sider a self-driving car that uses a neural network to detect
pedestrians and other obstructions (Bojarski et al., 2016).
*Equal contribution, alphabetical order. 1Cornell University.
Correspondence to: Chuan Guo <cg563@cornell.edu>, Geoff
Pleiss <geoff@cs.cornell.edu>, Yu Sun <ys646@cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 34 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Sydney, Australia, PMLR 70, 2017. Copyright 2017
by the author(s).
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
% of Samples
Avg. conﬁdence
Accuracy
LeNet (1998)
CIFAR-100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Avg. conﬁdence
Accuracy
ResNet (2016)
CIFAR-100
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Accuracy
Error=44.9
Outputs
Gap
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Error=30.6
Outputs
Gap
Conﬁdence
Figure 1. Conﬁdence histograms (top) and reliability diagrams
(bottom) for a 5-layer LeNet (left) and a 110-layer ResNet (right)
on CIFAR-100. Refer to the text below for detailed illustration.
If the detection network is not able to conﬁdently predict
the presence or absence of immediate obstructions, the car
should rely more on the output of other sensors for braking.
Alternatively, in automated health care, control should be
passed on to human doctors when the conﬁdence of a dis-
ease diagnosis network is low (Jiang et al., 2012). Specif-
ically, a network should provide a calibrated conﬁdence
measure in addition to its prediction. In other words, the
probability associated with the predicted class label should
reﬂect its ground truth correctness likelihood.
Calibrated conﬁdence estimates are also important for
model interpretability. Humans have a natural cognitive in-
tuition for probabilities (Cosmides & Tooby, 1996). Good
conﬁdence estimates provide a valuable extra bit of infor-
mation to establish trustworthiness with the user – espe-
cially for neural networks, whose classiﬁcation decisions
are often difﬁcult to interpret. Further, good probability
estimates can be used to incorporate neural networks into
other probabilistic models. For example, one can improve
performance by combining network outputs with a lan-

--- PAGE 2 ---
guage model in speech recognition (Hannun et al., 2014;
Xiong et al., 2016), or with camera information for object
detection (Kendall & Cipolla, 2016).
In 2005, Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana (2005) showed that
neural networks typically produce well-calibrated proba-
bilities on binary classiﬁcation tasks. While neural net-
works today are undoubtedly more accurate than they were
a decade ago, we discover with great surprise that mod-
ern neural networks are no longer well-calibrated . This
is visualized in Figure 1, which compares a 5-layer LeNet
(left) (LeCun et al., 1998) with a 110-layer ResNet (right)
(He et al., 2016) on the CIFAR-100 dataset. The top row
shows the distribution of prediction conﬁdence (i.e. prob-
abilities associated with the predicted label) as histograms.
The average conﬁdence of LeNet closely matches its accu-
racy, while the average conﬁdence of the ResNet is substan-
tially higher than its accuracy. This is further illustrated in
the bottom row reliability diagrams (DeGroot & Fienberg,
1983; Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005), which show ac-
curacy as a function of conﬁdence. We see that LeNet is
well-calibrated, as conﬁdence closely approximates the ex-
pected accuracy (i.e. the bars align roughly along the diag-
onal). On the other hand, the ResNet’s accuracy is better,
but does not match its conﬁdence.
Our goal is not only to understand why neural networks
have become miscalibrated, but also to identify what meth-
ods can alleviate this problem. In this paper, we demon-
strate on several computer vision and NLP tasks that neu-
ral networks produce conﬁdences that cannot represent true
probabilities. Additionally, we offer insight and intuition
into network training and architectural trends that may
cause miscalibration. Finally, we compare various post-
processing calibration methods on state-of-the-art neural
networks, and introduce several extensions of our own.
Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that a single-parameter variant of Platt
scaling (Platt et al., 1999) – which we refer to as temper-
ature scaling – is often the most effective method at ob-
taining calibrated probabilities. Because this method is
straightforward to implement with existing deep learning
frameworks, it can be easily adopted in practical settings.
2. Deﬁnitions
The problem we address in this paper is supervised multi-
class classiﬁcation with neural networks. The inputX∈X
and label Y ∈ Y = {1,...,K } are random variables
that follow a ground truth joint distribution π(X,Y ) =
π(Y|X)π(X). Let h be a neural network with h(X) =
( ˆY, ˆP ), where ˆY is a class prediction and ˆP is its associ-
ated conﬁdence, i.e. probability of correctness. We would
like the conﬁdence estimate ˆP to be calibrated, which in-
tuitively means that ˆP represents a true probability. For
example, given 100 predictions, each with conﬁdence of
0.8, we expect that 80 should be correctly classiﬁed. More
formally, we deﬁne perfect calibration as
P
(
ˆY =Y | ˆP =p
)
=p, ∀p∈ [0, 1] (1)
where the probability is over the joint distribution. In all
practical settings, achieving perfect calibration is impos-
sible. Additionally, the probability in (1) cannot be com-
puted using ﬁnitely many samples since ˆP is a continuous
random variable. This motivates the need for empirical ap-
proximations that capture the essence of (1).
Reliability Diagrams (e.g. Figure 1 bottom) are a visual
representation of model calibration (DeGroot & Fienberg,
1983; Niculescu-Mizil & Caruana, 2005). These diagrams
plot expected sample accuracy as a function of conﬁdence.
If the model is perfectly calibrated – i.e. if (1) holds – then
the diagram should plot the identity function. Any devia-
tion from a perfect diagonal represents miscalibration.
To estimate the expected accuracy from ﬁnite samples, we
group predictions intoM interval bins (each of size 1/M)
and calculate the accuracy of each bin. Let Bm be the set
of indices of samples whose prediction conﬁdence falls into
the intervalIm = (m−1
M , m
M ]. The accuracy ofBm is
acc(Bm) = 1
|Bm|
∑
i∈Bm
1(ˆyi =yi),
where ˆyi andyi are the predicted and true class labels for
samplei. Basic probability tells us that acc(Bm) is an un-
biased and consistent estimator of P( ˆY = Y | ˆP ∈ Im).
We deﬁne the average conﬁdence within binBm as
conf(Bm) = 1
|Bm|
∑
i∈Bm
ˆpi,
where ˆpi is the conﬁdence for sample i. acc(Bm) and
conf(Bm) approximate the left-hand and right-hand sides
of (1) respectively for bin Bm. Therefore, a perfectly cal-
ibrated model will have acc(Bm) = conf( Bm) for all
m∈{ 1,...,M }. Note that reliability diagrams do not dis-
play the proportion of samples in a given bin, and thus can-
not be used to estimate how many samples are calibrated.
Expected Calibration Error (ECE). While reliability
diagrams are useful visual tools, it is more convenient to
have a scalar summary statistic of calibration. Since statis-
tics comparing two distributions cannot be comprehensive,
previous works have proposed variants, each with a unique
emphasis. One notion of miscalibration is the difference in
expectation between conﬁdence and accuracy, i.e.
E
ˆP
[⏐⏐⏐P
(
ˆY =Y | ˆP =p
)
−p
⏐⏐⏐
]
(2)
Expected Calibration Error (Naeini et al., 2015) – or ECE
– approximates (2) by partitioning predictions into M
equally-spaced bins (similar to the reliability diagrams) and