=== FILE: 16_spiess.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
Calibration and Correctness of
Language Models for Code
Claudio Spiess ∗
UC Davis
USA
cvspiess@ucdavis.edu
David Gros ∗
UC Davis
USA
dgros@ucdavis.edu
Kunal Suresh Pai
UC Davis
USA
kunpai@ucdavis.edu
Michael Pradel
Univ. of Stuttgart
Germany
michael@binaervarianz.de
Md Rafiqul Islam Rabin
Univ. of Houston
USA
mrabin@central.uh.edu
Amin Alipour
Univ. of Houston
USA
maalipou@central.uh.edu
Susmit Jha
SRI
USA
susmit.jha@sri.com
Prem Devanbu
UC Davis
USA
ptdevanbu@ucdavis.edu
Toufique Ahmed
UC Davis
USA
tfahmed@ucdavis.edu
Abstract—Machine learning models are widely used, but can
also often be wrong. Users would benefit from a reliable indi-
cation of whether a given output from a given model should
be trusted, so a rational decision can be made whether to use
the output or not. For example, outputs can be associated with
a confidence measure; if this confidence measure is strongly
associated with likelihood of correctness, then the model is said
to be well-calibrated.
A well-calibrated confidence measure can serve as a basis for
rational, graduated decision-making on how much review and
care is needed when using generated code. Calibration has so
far been studied in mostly non-generative (e.g., classification)
settings, especially in software engineering. However, generated
code can quite often be wrong: Given generated code, developers
must decide whether to use directly, use after varying intensity
of careful review, or discard model-generated code. Thus, cali-
bration is vital in generative settings.
We make several contributions. We develop a framework for
evaluating the calibration of code-generating models. We consider
several tasks, correctness criteria, datasets, and approaches, and
find that, by and large, generative code models we test are not
well-calibrated out of the box. We then show how calibration
can be improved using standard methods, such as Platt scaling.
Since Platt scaling relies on the prior availability of correctness
data, we evaluate the applicability and generalizability of Platt
scaling in software engineering, discuss settings where it has good
potential for practical use, and settings where it does not. Our
contributions will lead to better-calibrated decision-making in the
current use of code generated by language models, and offers a
framework for future research to further improve calibration
methods for generative models in software engineering.
Index Terms—LLM, Calibration, Confidence Measure
I. I NTRODUCTION
Generative large language models (LLMs) are now widely-
used for code completion in IDEs. However, LLMs make
mistakes: they can generate known buggy code [1], or code
with risky vulnerabilities [2], [3]. Despite these risks, LLM
“copilots” [4] are growing in popularity—thus there is a grow-
ing concern that bad LLM-generated code could be integrated
into widely-used software. Given that LLMs might generate
*Equal contribution. Order determined by random coin flip.
buggy code, how should a developer decide whether generated
code is correct or not?
One possibility is to use the confidence, or probability
assigned to the generated code by the LLM itself. Consider
a developer who asks G PT-3.5 to complete some unfinished
code. For example, given the prefix
def clear(self, tag: Optional[Hashable] = None) -> None:
the model generates the completion
self.jobs[:] = [job for job in self.jobs if job.tag != tag]
with an average per-token confidence of 91%, suggesting
high confidence (based on its training) that the code is a
likely completion for the given prefix. However, this code
is known to be buggy! In fact, when we test thousands of
line completions, in cases where the average probability was
greater than 90%, only 52% actually passed test cases. One
can also find reverse examples, where the LLM has very little
confidence, but the generated code is actually correct.
We make two observations. First, since LLMs can make
mistakes, users would benefit from a reliable indication of
confidence that the generated code is actually correct. Second,
such indications of confidence, when well-aligned with actual
correctness, can support well-justified software quality control
measures, and thus improve the reliability of the AI4SE ecosys-
tem
. When an LLM-offered code suggestion is accompanied
by a numerical “confidence” signal e.g., a probability measure,
then this signal should be well-aligned with the likelihood that
the code is actually correct. Such a measure is said to be well-
calibrated.
Calibration has been studied in other settings e.g., classi-
cally in weather prediction and recently for software-related
classification tasks [5]. In this paper, we study the calibration
of generative1 large language models, when used in practical
software engineering settings, such as line-level code comple-
tion, function synthesis, and code-repair.
1We note that the notion of correctness for generative tasks is quite different
than for classification tasks, where the output is a label, rather than a sequence
of tokens.
540
2025 IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)
1558-1225/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00040

--- PAGE 2 ---
A well-calibrated confidence measure would support ratio-
nal risk-management in the development process, and help
quality-improvement processes. For example, a development
team might reasonably adopt a policy that: a) generated code
associated with high confidence could be reviewed lightly and
quickly accepted; b) suggestions with a medium confidence
value should be reviewed more carefully before acceptance;
and c) suggestions with a low confidence value should be
simply rejected or the prompt should be adjusted.
Despite its importance and widespread use of LLMs in
software engineering, the correctness and calibration of code-
generating models currently is not well understood. In par-
ticular, it is currently unknown whether confidence measures
provided by the LLMs themselves align well with actual code
correctness.
This paper does an empirical study of the calibration of
code-generating models using several prior techniques and
explores approaches for improving calibration further. To this
end, we describe an evaluation framework for the calibration
of code-generating language models. We instantiate the frame-
work for different tasks, e.g., code synthesis, code completion,
and program repair, using different correctness criteria (exact-
match w.r.t. a reference solution and correctness-modulo-
testing), and by applying the framework to different models.
Based on this framework, we evaluate well-established tech-
niques for estimating how a model’s confidence align with
actual correctness; then, based on our findings, we present
improvements over existing techniques.
Our work yields several findings:
• The alignment of confidence measures provided by LLMs
with standard notions of code correctness is poor, when
evaluated on realistic datasets across different tasks, in-
cluding completion, synthesis, and automated program
repair. We observe generally high ECE (Expected Cal-
ibration Error, described in Section III-C) across all
settings, ranging from 0.09 to 0.73, suggesting intrinsic
LLM confidences are poor predictors of code correctness.
• We evaluate several reflective approaches to improve this
alignment, and also confidence rescaling using known
correctness labels. While rescaling generally improves
calibration, reflective methods are rather inconsistent,
working better in some settings than others.
• Finally, we focus on the most widely-used SE task for
LLMs, viz. code completion, and use the instructable
GPT-3.5 model, and few-shotting, in a reflective setting,
and show that calibration improves substantially from the
skill score 2 of 0 to a much higher level of 0.15.
Our work considers the important problem of providing de-
velopers with a reliable indication of whether generated code
is correct, and (especially for the widely-used task of code
completion) offers an approach, using BM25-aided [6] few-
shotting, that has potential practical value.
2Brier Skill score, which we explain below in § III-C.
A. Research Agenda
Code LLMs are perhaps mostly widely-used for code sug-
gestion/completion; other tasks include code synthesis and
program repair.
RQ 1. How well is the confidence of language models in their output
aligned with the empirical correctness of the output, specifically
for common generative tasks, viz. function synthesis, line-level code
completion, and program repair?
We evaluate the output for two different notions of correctness,
viz., exact-match with known correct code, and second, passing
all given tests.
In general, the levels of alignment between the intrinsic
confidence ( viz., directly provided by the LLM) and correct-
ness is poor. This indicates need for better approaches to
calibration. We then explore several engineering responses to
the problem, listed in the following research questions. First,
we consider the standard approach of confidence rescaling,
using Platt scaling.
RQ 2. Can alignment between LLM confidence in generated code,
and its correctness, be improved by confidence rescaling?
While confidence rescaling can help remedy over- and
under-confidence, it does require some data to determine
the parameters of the scaling function. We also analyze and
discuss some considerations in obtaining this data, specifically
for code-generation tasks.
Next, we investigate the possibility that the model is able
to better calibrate upon reflection. We ask the model (using a
separate reflective prompt) to consider its own generated code
and judge its confidence in the quality.
RQ 3. Is confidence obtained by reflection better aligned with correct-
ness?
Finally we investigate few-shotting, to see whether it helps
calibration for the widely used task of code completion.
RQ 4. Can we use few-shot techniques to achieve better calibrated
confidence for code completion, using an instruction-tuned model
with in-context learning?
II. B ACKGROUND
A. Calibration
This concept originates in prediction problems like weather
forecasting. Consider a weather model predicting a 70%
confidence (probability) of rain the next day. If we ran this
model for a while, and observed rain in 70% of the days where
a forecast with 70% confidence was made, then we call it a
well-calibrated model. A well-calibrated model’s confidence in
a given output, is quite close to the empirical relative frequency
(likelihood) with which the output is actually correct.
With well-calibrated rain-forecasting, a user has options for
a rational response: at 20% confidence of rain, one might take
a hat; at higher confidences, one might take an umbrella; if
even higher, one might take the bus rather than walk, etc.
From an earlier work by Jiang et al. [7]: given a model M,
541