=== FILE: 17_lora.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
LORA: L OW-R ANK ADAPTATION OF LARGE LAN-
GUAGE MODELS
Edward Hu∗ Yelong Shen∗ Phillip Wallis Zeyuan Allen-Zhu
Yuanzhi Li Shean Wang Lu Wang Weizhu Chen
Microsoft Corporation
{edwardhu, yeshe, phwallis, zeyuana,
yuanzhil, swang, luw, wzchen }@microsoft.com
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu
(Version 2)
ABSTRACT
An important paradigm of natural language processing consists of large-scale pre-
training on general domain data and adaptation to particular tasks or domains. As
we pre-train larger models, full ﬁne-tuning, which retrains all model parameters,
becomes less feasible. Using GPT-3 175B as an example – deploying indepen-
dent instances of ﬁne-tuned models, each with 175B parameters, is prohibitively
expensive. We propose Low-Rank Adaptation, or LoRA, which freezes the pre-
trained model weights and injects trainable rank decomposition matrices into each
layer of the Transformer architecture, greatly reducing the number of trainable pa-
rameters for downstream tasks. Compared to GPT-3 175B ﬁne-tuned with Adam,
LoRA can reduce the number of trainable parameters by 10,000 times and the
GPU memory requirement by 3 times. LoRA performs on-par or better than ﬁne-
tuning in model quality on RoBERTa, DeBERTa, GPT-2, and GPT-3, despite hav-
ing fewer trainable parameters, a higher training throughput, and, unlike adapters,
no additional inference latency . We also provide an empirical investigation into
rank-deﬁciency in language model adaptation, which sheds light on the efﬁcacy of
LoRA. We release a package that facilitates the integration of LoRA with PyTorch
models and provide our implementations and model checkpoints for RoBERTa,
DeBERTa, and GPT-2 athttps://github.com/microsoft/LoRA.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Pretrained 
Weights
𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑
x
h
𝐵 = 0
𝐴 = 𝒩(0, 𝜎2)
𝑑
𝑟
Pretrained 
Weights
𝑊 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑
x
f(x)
𝑑
Figure 1: Our reparametriza-
tion. We only trainA andB.
Many applications in natural language processing rely on adapt-
ing one large-scale, pre-trained language model to multiple down-
stream applications. Such adaptation is usually done via ﬁne-tuning,
which updates all the parameters of the pre-trained model. The ma-
jor downside of ﬁne-tuning is that the new model contains as many
parameters as in the original model. As larger models are trained
every few months, this changes from a mere “inconvenience” for
GPT-2 (Radford et al., b) or RoBERTa large (Liu et al., 2019) to a
critical deployment challenge for GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) with
175 billion trainable parameters.1
Many sought to mitigate this by adapting only some parameters or
learning external modules for new tasks. This way, we only need
to store and load a small number of task-speciﬁc parameters in ad-
dition to the pre-trained model for each task, greatly boosting the
operational efﬁciency when deployed. However, existing techniques
∗Equal contribution.
0Compared to V1, this draft includes better baselines, experiments on GLUE, and more on adapter latency.
1While GPT-3 175B achieves non-trivial performance with few-shot learning, ﬁne-tuning boosts its perfor-
mance signiﬁcantly as shown in Appendix A.
1
arXiv:2106.09685v2  [cs.CL]  16 Oct 2021

--- PAGE 2 ---
often introduce inference latency (Houlsby et al., 2019; Rebufﬁ et al., 2017) by extending model
depth or reduce the model’s usable sequence length (Li & Liang, 2021; Lester et al., 2021; Ham-
bardzumyan et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021) (Section 3). More importantly, these method often fail to
match the ﬁne-tuning baselines, posing a trade-off between efﬁciency and model quality.
We take inspiration from Li et al. (2018a); Aghajanyan et al. (2020) which show that the learned
over-parametrized models in fact reside on a low intrinsic dimension. We hypothesize that the
change in weights during model adaptation also has a low “intrinsic rank”, leading to our proposed
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) approach. LoRA allows us to train some dense layers in a neural
network indirectly by optimizing rank decomposition matrices of the dense layers’ change during
adaptation instead, while keeping the pre-trained weights frozen, as shown in Figure 1. Using GPT-3
175B as an example, we show that a very low rank (i.e.,r in Figure 1 can be one or two) sufﬁces even
when the full rank (i.e., d) is as high as 12,288, making LoRA both storage- and compute-efﬁcient.
LoRA possesses several key advantages.
• A pre-trained model can be shared and used to build many small LoRA modules for dif-
ferent tasks. We can freeze the shared model and efﬁciently switch tasks by replacing the
matricesA andB in Figure 1, reducing the storage requirement and task-switching over-
head signiﬁcantly.
• LoRA makes training more efﬁcient and lowers the hardware barrier to entry by up to 3
times when using adaptive optimizers since we do not need to calculate the gradients or
maintain the optimizer states for most parameters. Instead, we only optimize the injected,
much smaller low-rank matrices.
• Our simple linear design allows us to merge the trainable matrices with the frozen weights
when deployed, introducing no inference latency compared to a fully ﬁne-tuned model, by
construction.
• LoRA is orthogonal to many prior methods and can be combined with many of them, such
as preﬁx-tuning. We provide an example in Appendix E.
Terminologies and Conventions We make frequent references to the Transformer architecture
and use the conventional terminologies for its dimensions. We call the input and output di-
mension size of a Transformer layer dmodel. We use Wq, Wk, Wv, and Wo to refer to the
query/key/value/output projection matrices in the self-attention module. W orW0 refers to a pre-
trained weight matrix and ∆W its accumulated gradient update during adaptation. We use r to
denote the rank of a LoRA module. We follow the conventions set out by (Vaswani et al., 2017;
Brown et al., 2020) and use Adam (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019; Kingma & Ba, 2017) for model
optimization and use a Transformer MLP feedforward dimensiondffn = 4×dmodel.
2 P ROBLEM STATEMENT
While our proposal is agnostic to training objective, we focus on language modeling as our motivat-
ing use case. Below is a brief description of the language modeling problem and, in particular, the
maximization of conditional probabilities given a task-speciﬁc prompt.
Suppose we are given a pre-trained autoregressive language model PΦ(y|x) parametrized by Φ.
For instance, PΦ(y|x) can be a generic multi-task learner such as GPT (Radford et al., b; Brown
et al., 2020) based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017). Consider adapting this
pre-trained model to downstream conditional text generation tasks, such as summarization, machine
reading comprehension (MRC), and natural language to SQL (NL2SQL). Each downstream task is
represented by a training dataset of context-target pairs:Z ={(xi,yi)}i=1,..,N , where bothxi and
yi are sequences of tokens. For example, in NL2SQL, xi is a natural language query and yi its
corresponding SQL command; for summarization,xi is the content of an article andyi its summary.
2