=== FILE: 18_qlora.pdf ===

--- PAGE 1 ---
QL ORA: Efficient Finetuning of Quantized LLMs
Tim Dettmers∗ Artidoro Pagnoni∗ Ari Holtzman
Luke Zettlemoyer
University of Washington
{dettmers,artidoro,ahai,lsz}@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
We present QL ORA, an efficient finetuning approach that reduces memory us-
age enough to finetune a 65B parameter model on a single 48GB GPU while
preserving full 16-bit finetuning task performance. QL ORA backpropagates gradi-
ents through a frozen, 4-bit quantized pretrained language model into Low Rank
Adapters (LoRA). Our best model family, which we name Guanaco, outperforms
all previous openly released models on the Vicuna benchmark, reaching 99.3%
of the performance level of ChatGPT while only requiring 24 hours of finetuning
on a single GPU. QL ORA introduces a number of innovations to save memory
without sacrificing performance: (a) 4-bit NormalFloat (NF4), a new data type that
is information theoretically optimal for normally distributed weights (b) Double
Quantization to reduce the average memory footprint by quantizing the quantization
constants, and (c) Paged Optimizers to manage memory spikes. We use QL ORA
to finetune more than 1,000 models, providing a detailed analysis of instruction
following and chatbot performance across 8 instruction datasets, multiple model
types (LLaMA, T5), and model scales that would be infeasible to run with regular
finetuning (e.g. 33B and 65B parameter models). Our results show that QLoRA
finetuning on a small high-quality dataset leads to state-of-the-art results, even
when using smaller models than the previous SoTA. We provide a detailed analysis
of chatbot performance based on both human and GPT-4 evaluations showing that
GPT-4 evaluations are a cheap and reasonable alternative to human evaluation. Fur-
thermore, we find that current chatbot benchmarks are not trustworthy to accurately
evaluate the performance levels of chatbots. A lemon-picked analysis demonstrates
where Guanaco fails compared to ChatGPT. We release all of our models and code,
including CUDA kernels for 4-bit training.2
1 Introduction
Finetuning large language models (LLMs) is a highly effective way to improve their performance,
[40, 62, 43, 61, 59, 37] and to add desirable or remove undesirable behaviors [43, 2, 4]. However,
finetuning very large models is prohibitively expensive; regular 16-bit finetuning of a LLaMA 65B
parameter model [ 57] requires more than 780 GB of GPU memory. While recent quantization
methods can reduce the memory footprint of LLMs [14, 13, 18, 66], such techniques only work for
inference and break down during training [65].
We demonstrate for the first time that it is possible to finetune a quantized 4-bit model without any
performance degradation. Our method, QL ORA, uses a novel high-precision technique to quantize
a pretrained model to 4-bit, then adds a small set of learnable Low-rank Adapter weights [ 28]
∗Equal contribution.
2https://github.com/artidoro/qlora and https://github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2305.14314v1  [cs.LG]  23 May 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Table 1: Elo ratings for a competition between
models, averaged for 10,000 random initial order-
ings. The winner of a match is determined by
GPT-4 which declares which response is better for
a given prompt of the the Vicuna benchmark. 95%
confidence intervals are shown ( ±). After GPT-
4, Guanaco 33B and 65B win the most matches,
while Guanaco 13B scores better than Bard.
Model Size Elo
GPT-4 - 1348 ± 1
Guanaco 65B 41 GB 1022 ± 1
Guanaco 33B 21 GB 992 ± 1
Vicuna 13B 26 GB 974 ± 1
ChatGPT - 966 ± 1
Guanaco 13B 10 GB 916 ± 1
Bard - 902 ± 1
Guanaco 7B 6 GB 879 ± 1
that are tuned by backpropagating gradients through
the quantized weights.
QLORA reduces the average memory requirements
of finetuning a 65B parameter model from >780GB
of GPU memory to <48GB without degrading the
runtime or predictive performance compared to a 16-
bit fully finetuned baseline. This marks a significant
shift in accessibility of LLM finetuning: now the
largest publicly available models to date finetunable
on a single GPU. Using QLORA, we train the Gua-
naco family of models, with the second best model
reaching 97.8% of the performance level of ChatGPT
on the Vicuna [10] benchmark, while being trainable
in less than 12 hours on a single consumer GPU;
using a single professional GPU over 24 hours we
achieve 99.3% with our largest model, essentially
closing the gap to ChatGPT on the Vicuna bench-
mark. When deployed, our smallest Guanaco model
(7B parameters) requires just 5 GB of memory and outperforms a 26 GB Alpaca model by more than
20 percentage points on the Vicuna benchmark (Table 6).
QL ORA introduces multiple innovations designed to reduce memory use without sacrificing per-
formance: (1) 4-bit NormalFloat, an information theoretically optimal quantization data type for
normally distributed data that yields better empirical results than 4-bit Integers and 4-bit Floats.
(2) Double Quantization, a method that quantizes the quantization constants, saving an average
of about 0.37 bits per parameter (approximately 3 GB for a 65B model). (3) Paged Optimizers,
using NVIDIA unified memory to avoid the gradient checkpointing memory spikes that occur when
processing a mini-batch with a long sequence length. We combine these contributions into a better
tuned LoRA approach that includes adapters at every network layer and thereby avoids almost all of
the accuracy tradeoffs seen in prior work.
QLORA’s efficiency enables us to perform an in-depth study of instruction finetuning and chatbot
performance on model scales that would be impossible using regular finetuning due to memory
overhead. Therefore, we train more than 1,000 models across several instruction tuning datasets,
model architectures, and sizes between 80M to 65B parameters. In addition to showing that QL ORA
recovers 16-bit performance (§4) and training a state-of-the-art chatbot, Guanaco, (§5), we also
analyze trends in the trained models. First, we find that data quality is far more important than
dataset size, e.g., a 9k sample dataset (OASST1) outperformed a 450k sample dataset (FLAN v2,
subsampled) on chatbot performance, even when both are meant to support instruction following
generalization. Second, we show that strong Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU)
benchmark performance does not imply strong Vicuna chatbot benchmark performance and vice
versa—in other words, dataset suitability matters more than size for a given task.
Furthermore, we also provide a extensive analysis of chatbot performance that uses both human
raters and GPT-4 for evaluation. We use tournament-style benchmarking where models compete
against each other in matches to produce the best response for a given prompt. The winner of a
match is judged by either GPT-4 or human annotators. The tournament results are aggregated into
Elo scores [16, 17] which determine the ranking of chatbot performance. We find that GPT-4 and
human evaluations largely agree on the rank of model performance in the tournaments, but we also
find there are instances of strong disagreement. As such, we highlight that model-based evaluation
while providing a cheap alternative to human-annotation also has its uncertainties.
We augment our chatbot benchmark results with a qualitative analysis ofGuanaco models. Our analy-
sis highlights success and failure cases that were not captured by the quantitative benchmarks.
We release all model generations with human and GPT-4 annotations to facilitate further study. We
open-source our codebase and CUDA kernels and integrate our methods into the Hugging Face
transformers stack [64], making them easily accessible to all. We release a collection of adapters
for 7/13/33/65B size models, trained on 8 different instruction following datasets, for a total of 32
different open sourced, finetuned models.
2